
=== PAGE 19 ===
15
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER BREAKDOWN
What’s in this chapter:
Dice: How the dice work and how to roll them.
Tests and Contests: How characters deal with the situations
they’re confronted by.
Traits: The elements of every character.
Plot Points: The way players can influence the outcome
of their actions.
Assets and Complications: The positive and negative influences
that can tip the outcome and shape the story.
This chapter covers the rules and mechanics at the core of Cortex Prime. Everything 
else builds on these systems and procedures. Once you understand how these rules 
work—and the mods that change how they work—you can do whatever you want with 
the system. 
When this chapter refers to “you,” it’s usually a generic player, not necessarily the GM. 
In other words, this chapter is for everyone.
If you haven’t already read the “Cortex Primer” on page 6, go back and do that now.
PRIME
CORE


=== PAGE 20 ===
16
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
DICE
Cortex Prime uses five kinds of dice: ④, ⑥, ⑧, ⑩, ⑫. 
The number tells you how many sides the die has: the 
more sides, the bigger the numbers. A handful of dice is 
called a dice pool.
When you roll a die, the number on the uppermost face is 
the result. Usually you add results together to get a total. 
Adding results together is about the only math you need 
to do in Cortex Prime.
The dice introduce a random element to play, helping us 
resolve tests and contests. Bigger dice (more sides) means 
potentially better outcomes, and more dice means more 
reliable outcomes.
DIE RATINGS AND STEPS
Every trait in the game has a die rating. Whenever you use 
the trait, you pick up a die of that size for your dice pool. 
Occasionally, you’re asked to swap out one or more dice 
for bigger or smaller dice. This is called stepping up or 
stepping down a die rating. Stepping down a ④ makes it 
go away. A ⑫ can only be stepped up in certain situations, 
such as taking out a character.
To step up a die by one, swap it for a die that’s one step 
larger than the original. To step down a die by one, swap 
it out for a die that’s one step smaller.
Die ratings usually correspond to how much effect that 
trait has on the outcome of any given test or contest. 
They’re a useful shorthand for how strong, smart, skilled, 
or important a character is.
More sides doesn’t always mean better, so much as it 
means more important or significant in the story. Having 
a ⑫ in a trait like Strong vs a ⑫ in a trait like Justice 
doesn’t mean that strength or valuing justice measure the 
same things. It just means that being inhumanly strong 
can affect the outcome just as much as being obsessed 
with justice does.
STEPPING
UP BY 1
STEPPING
DOWN BY 1
STEPPING
UP BY 2
ARTUR TREFFNER
BEATS, SCENES, AND SESSIONS
Every time you sit down to play Cortex Prime, it’s called a session. The 
flow of the session can be broken down into scenes. Scenes can be 
further broken down into chunks called beats, and a test is a character’s 
attempt to do something (usually involving rolling some dice), typically 
over the course of a single beat. A contest is an exchange between two 
or more characters with conflicting goals. These concepts are the basic 
building blocks for creating a narrative.
For more on managing and running scenes, see Prime Scenes (page 86). 
For more on handling sessions of Cortex Prime, including preparing the 
session and GMCs, see Prime Sessions (page 108).


=== PAGE 21 ===
17
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
THE DICE POOL
Any time you’re called to roll dice for a test or contest, 
you assemble a dice pool out of relevant trait sets on your 
character file, plus any bonus dice from other sources. The 
dice pool represents all of the various things that might 
contribute to your success. There’s no maximum number 
of dice in a dice pool, but generally the pool includes 
anywhere from three to eight dice.
The GM assembles a dice pool (the opposition pool) 
based on what your character is up against. For a test, this 
usually starts with two difficulty dice chosen by the GM.
You are free to choose any two dice for your total. You don’t 
need to choose the two highest rolling dice. You may want 
to save a die with more sides for your effect die, even if it 
was the highest result. Likewise, the GM may decide to 
let the dice fall where they may and always keep the two 
highest rolling dice, or use the choice of two dice as a way 
to moderate the opposition without simply fudging dice.
You and the other players make decisions for the group 
in response to the challenging situations the GM pres­
ents. Not every decision needs to involve dice. Don’t bother 
picking up the dice unless the outcome of a roll—success 
or failure—would be interesting or move the story along, 
or unless there’s something keeping the player from 
doing what they want to do. If a particular outcome is 
guaranteed to happen, the GM might either describe 
what happens and move on, or have the player narrate 
the outcome of what their character does.
HITCHES AND BOTCHES
If you roll a 1 (a hitch) on a die, it doesn’t count toward 
your total at all and can’t be used as your effect die. It’s 
called a hitch because it’s a little obstacle that could lead 
to an inconvenience—a complication—without ensur­
ing failure. Set hitches aside for now. The GM has the 
option to activate those hitches to do things on their 
side of the table. The GM might also roll hitches—called
opportunities—which the players can activate.
If all your dice come up as 1, that’s a botch and it’s a sure 
sign of trouble, especially since your total is effectively 
zero. With a typical failed test or contest, not everything is 
bad. The story still moves forward, just not how the char­
acter might like. With a botch, there’s no ambiguity about 
it—things are bad for that character, and sometimes their 
story hits a brick wall for a moment.
Game mechanics that allow you to reroll dice can be used 
to reroll hitches or even a whole botch, so long as they 
haven’t been used to trigger any other game effect (such 
as a complication). The GM should ask the player if they 
have such a mechanic in play before spending the hitches 
for complications or other effects.
SFX
Many characters have exception-based features called 
SFX (special effects) that can alter or influence the 
dice pool, dice results, or even the story directly. SFX 
frequently come in the form of an activating condition, 
some kind of cost or drawback, and then some kind of 
benefit or bonus. You can read more about SFX in Prime 
Characters (page 61).
YANGTIAN LI
For a contest, whoever acts first—usually a player—puts 
together a dice pool. Instead of difficulty dice, the opposi­
tion puts together their own dice pool once they see how 
the initiating character does on their roll.
The doom pool is a mod that does away with difficulty 
dice and replaces them with a pool of dice that grows 
and shrinks during play. Any reference to difficulty dice 
usually applies to games using a doom pool also.
ROLLING DICE
Usually when you roll two or more dice, you choose two 
results to add together for your total, and a third die to 
use as the effect die. If you’re rolling one die, your total 
is equal to the result of that die. If you don’t have a third 
die, your effect die starts at ④. See “Effect Dice” on page 
20 for more on how effect dice work. 
All rolls, including the GM’s, are done in the open. After 
rolling dice, leave them on the table in view of every­
one. Only pick up the dice once a test or contest has
been resolved.
The Child wants to find out 
where the portal leads.
Based on the difficulty of the 
task, the GM assembles a pool 
of ⑧ ⑧ which is considered 
challenging.
Physical
Mental
Social
We differentiate the dice results by the 
color of the outline, interior, and numbers.
Red interiors with white 
numbers is die type.
DICE RESULTS
TOTAL
EFFECT DIE
8
17
13
Black interiors
with red outlines
and white numbers 
are hitches.
Green interiors and 
outlines with white 
numbers are chosen 
effect dice.
Red outlines with 
white interiors and 
black numbers 
show a die result.
Gray outlines 
and numbers are 
unchosen results.


=== PAGE 22 ===
18
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
That difficulty is the number you need to beat with your 
own total when you roll your dice for the test. If you beat 
it, the test is a success. If you didn’t beat it, the test is a 
failure. Beating a difficulty means rolling higher than the 
difficulty total. If your total is the same as the difficulty’s 
total, you didn’t beat it, so this still counts as a failure.
The difficulty dice are always two dice of the same number 
of sides, based on the situation:
TESTS
AND CONTESTS
A test is the central mechanic of rolling dice to resolve a 
situation by determining if there’s a successful outcome 
or a challenging failure. Almost always, tests are initiated 
by the GM asking the player, “What do you do?” 
When a PC gets into a conflict over something they want, 
this is called a contest, which determines if any other 
character can intervene, thwart, or oppose the charac­
ter. Contests are almost always initiated by a player, who 
picks up dice and essentially says, “I’m doing this. Who’s 
stopping me?”
If the outcome is guaranteed or nothing opposes or acts 
against the character, tests and contests can be resolved 
without rolling dice. A player can always choose not to 
respond to a test and find another way forward. A GM or 
other player can always respond to a contest by declar­
ing that they don’t oppose the initiating player, in which 
case the contest’s outcome is determined as if the player 
succeeded. In both cases, there’s usually no need for an 
effect die; if one is needed, use the largest die in the dice 
pool (the opposition pool for a test, or the player’s dice 
pool for a contest).
DIFFICULTY
AND OPPOSITION
Whenever you roll dice, you want to get a higher total 
than your opposition. This is the core principle of Cortex 
Prime’s dice mechanics. The key difference between tests 
and contests is who rolls the dice first.
TESTS: SUCCESS OR FAILURE
If it’s a test, the GM assembles an opposition pool and rolls 
it, setting the difficulty by adding together two dice from 
the roll and announcing the total.
Very Easy
Challenging
Hard
Very Hard
Easy
KEKAI KOTAKI
In addition to difficulty dice, the GM picks up one or more 
dice based on appropriate traits from the location, oppos­
ing GMCs, or the scene itself. When in doubt, the GM can 
simply add one or more six-siders to represent increasing 
risk, threats, or challenges.
Mary Rose calls for Adam to make a test when 
his Hero sneaks past a lazy watchman. To set the 
difficulty, she puts together an opposition pool using 
⑥⑥ (because it’s an easy test) and a ⑧ for the 
watchman. That’s a pool of three dice: ⑧+⑥+⑥.
Tests are usually uncomplicated. A success means the 
character does what they wanted to do, and a failure 
means they don’t. Occasionally, the player sets the diffi­
culty for a GMC’s test. In this case, the player rolls first 
and the GM rolls to beat the difficulty set by the player. 
Usually, though, the GM sets up scenes where the players 
roll tests to change the status quo being maintained by 
the GMCs.


=== PAGE 23 ===
19
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
CONTESTS: THE STRUGGLE
When you engage in a contest, you’re the one initiating 
it, so you pick up the dice and roll first, adding together 
two results for a total. If your opposition decides against 
opposing you after seeing what you rolled, you automat­
ically get what you want. If your opposition decides to 
stop you, they assemble a dice pool and try to beat the 
difficulty you just set.
If your opposition doesn’t beat your difficulty, you’ve won 
the contest and you get what you want. If they beat your 
difficulty, the ball’s back in your court. You can choose 
to give in, in which case you define the failure on your 
own terms, you cannot immediately initiate another 
contest with your opponent, and you get a ●
Ⓟ. Otherwise, 
your opposition’s total becomes the new difficulty, and 
you must roll again to try to beat it. Failing to beat your 
opposition means your opponent gets to define how they 
stopped you.
Contests go back and forth until one side gives in or fails 
to beat the difficulty. The losing side picks up a compli­
cation or, if it’s a high stakes scene, is taken out of the 
scene—they’re beaten, knocked down, or possibly even 
on their last breath. Players can spend ●
Ⓟ to avoid being 
taken out, but they still take a complication.
Sometimes the GM may initiate a contest when a GMC 
chooses to do a thing; the GM is essentially asking the 
players, “What are you going to do about it?” However, 
because Cortex Prime games are about the PCs more than 
the GMCs, this shouldn’t happen very 
often in any given session.
OUTCOMES
When you win a test or contest, you get what you want, 
and you can narrate the outcome. What this means 
usually depends on what you said you were trying to 
do. Was your character trying to hack the mainframe? 
It’s done. Knock out the bad guy? They did that, too. The 
player describes it and then the story moves on. If the 
player can’t think of what might happen if they succeed, 
the GM can do the honors, and remind the player to think 
about what the consequences of success are before they 
roll the dice next time.
When you fail, however, try to be entertaining in how you 
describe your failure. The only lasting effect is the story 
heading in a different direction than you wanted, unless 
you picked up a complication or you rolled all hitches and 
came up with a total botch. 
Early in a scene, Adam’s Hero triumphed over a 
rockslide, leaping to safety with a priceless artifact. 
However, as Adam rolls to signal a friendly plane 
overhead with a flare gun, all of his dice come up 
hitches! Had he simply failed the test, maybe the flare 
gun jammed and he’d need to change his situation 
a little—get to higher ground, build a signal fire, or 
something like that—before trying again. Instead, 
with this botch, Adam suggests that it wasn’t a 
friendly plane after all, and maybe he’s called down
a lot of trouble for his Hero instead.
OUTCOMES CHANGE
THE STATUS QUO
When your character fails, it doesn’t necessarily 
mean the scene ends and their goals are thwarted 
permanently. A scene can have many tests and 
contests in it, involving many characters, some­
times even several tests or contests going on at 
the same time. Failure should always mean that 
the situation has changed in one way or another. 
Consequences should always come from failure, 
even if they’re as simple as “You dropped it; now 
what do you do?”
In some cases, losing a test or contest can 
result in your character being taken out of 
the scene. But in most other cases, your 
character only needs to revisit their new 
circumstances and take a different course 
of action, perhaps with a complication now 
making their lives a little trickier.


=== PAGE 24 ===
20 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
Adam’s Roll
Opposition Roll
HEROIC SUCCESS
In a test, if you beat the difficulty by 5 or more on a roll, 
you’ve got a heroic success. You not only get what you 
want, your roll produces unexpected beneficial results. 
In a contest, if your opponent loses by 5 or more, you’ve 
got a heroic success and are the clear victor. As with any 
success, the GM should ask you to describe your amazing 
efforts, but that’s just icing on the cake. There’s an added 
benefit, as well.
The effect die (see following section) is stepped up by one 
for every 5 points you beat the difficulty by.
Adam’s Hero makes a test and beats the difficulty
by 10—a heroic success. His effect die is a ⑥.
The complication or stress created from the test
is a ⑩: the ⑥ stepped up twice, once for every
5 points he beat the difficulty by.
INELIGIBLE DICE
You can’t choose a die that produced a hitch for an effect 
die. If you spend ●
Ⓟ to add more dice to a total beyond 
the first two, those dice can’t also be used as effect dice. 
If there are no dice left in the pool once the total is deter­
mined (or the remaining dice are hitches or otherwise 
spoken for), the effect die is always a ④.
CAROL AZEVEDO
GM’S DIFFICULTY
12
TINA’S DICE RESULTS 
TOTAL EFFECT
DIE
ASSET 
CREATED
16
Security 
System 
16
Security 
System 
Some SFX might specify a heroic success as the activat­
ing element. Often, these sorts of SFX create additional 
assets or complications beyond the one that may have 
been created from the test or contest, or they change the 
story in some interesting way by introducing a specific 
flavor to the outcome.
EFFECT DICE
The effect die is chosen from the dice pool after the dice 
used for the total are taken out and added together. The 
effect die is used for things like determining the size of an 
asset or complication, or (if you’re using the mod) stress. 
Only the size of the effect die (number of sides) matters; 
the result rolled on the effect die has no further use in the 
roll. You won’t always need an effect die, especially when 
you’re only concerned with pass/fail outcomes.
Tina’s Sage is trying to set up a new security 
monitoring system in an enemy base. Mary Rose
has set a difficulty of 12. Tina rolls a pool of five dice: 
a ⑫, ⑧, ⑧, ⑥, and ④. The ⑧ ⑧ each come up 
8, which add together for a total of 16, beating the 
difficulty. The ⑫ comes up 2 so Tina chooses the 
⑫ as the effect die. This means the Sage’s security 
system—an asset—is rated at ⑫. Had Tina rolled an 
8 on the ⑫ and a 2 on one of the ⑧ instead, and 
she’d chosen a ⑧ effect die, the security system 
would not have been as strong. In either case, the 
fact that the die rolled a 2 doesn’t matter. Only the 
number of sides matters.


=== PAGE 25 ===
SFX AND EFFECT DICE
SFX may refer to effect dice. Here’s an example: 
	
ɬ Lunar Strength: When the moon is full and your dice pool 
includes your Physical attribute, spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up the 
effect die by one. 
ADAM’S 
EFFECT DIE
GMC’S 
EFFECT DIE
DOES GM 
SPEND 
 ?
OUTCOME
NO
GMC taken out
YES
GMC takes 
complication
NO
GMC takes 
complication
If the contest isn’t a high stakes scene and there’s no peril­
ous outcome to worry about, the losing side just takes a 
complication equal to the effect die of the winning side—
unless the opponent’s effect die is equal to or larger than 
yours, in which case your effect die is stepped down by 
one before being applied as a complication.
Adam wins a contest between his Hero and a 
GMC opponent in a standard action scene. This 
means Adam’s Hero imposes a complication on his 
opponent. His effect die is a ⑩, and theirs is a ⑫. 
His ⑩ effect die is smaller than their ⑫ effect die, 
so it’s stepped down by one before it’s used against 
them—in this case as a ⑧ complication.
EFFECT DICE IN AUTOMATIC OUTCOMES
When a test or contest isn’t opposed and you need an 
effect die, use the largest die in the opposition pool (for a 
test) or the initiating dice pool (for a contest). Most of the 
time, however, you won’t need an effect die if no test or 
contest is actually rolled.
Adam declares that his Hero reaches for a priceless 
artifact and asks, “Who’s going to stop me?” 
Mary Rose and the other players elect not to
oppose him, so his Hero takes the artifact. If for 
some reason Adam needed to know how well his 
character took hold of the artifact, he would look at 
the dice pool he just assembled for the contest and 
choose the largest die in the pool for the effect die.
RAFAEL SARMENTO
If any rule or SFX steps up the effect die beyond ⑫, either 
the effect is an automatic take out or victory, or another 
die from the pool is turned into a second effect die.
Some SFX let you choose more than one effect die. You can 
also spend a ●
Ⓟ to add an extra effect die. In both cases, 
you have to choose from the dice left over from your roll. 
If there are none, use the ④ default. If an SFX tells you to 
step up or step down an effect die and you have multiple 
effect dice, only modify one of them for each SFX that 
you’re using.
EFFECT DICE IN OPPOSITION
When rolling dice for tests, the effect die serves as a useful 
indicator for the scope of the action’s outcome. A ⑫ effect 
die means the test had a mind-blowing outcome, while a 
④ means it was marginal at best. There’s usually no need 
to compare your effect die with the opposition’s effect die.
The effect die is more important in a contest. If you win 
a contest, you compare your effect die against the oppo­
sition’s effect die (from the roll they just made to try to 
beat you). 
In a scene that the GM has determined is high stakes, 
if your effect die is larger than your opponent’s, they’re 
taken out of the scene. If their effect die is equal to or 
larger than yours, or they spend a ●
Ⓟ to avoid it, your 
opposition isn’t taken out. Instead, they take a compli­
cation equal to your effect die.
Adam wins a contest in a high stakes scene between 
his Hero and a GMC. His effect die is a ⑧, and theirs 
is a ⑥. Adam’s Hero takes out his opponent, unless 
Mary Rose spends a ●
Ⓟ to prevent it. If that happens, 
the GMC picks up a ⑧ complication because of 
Adam’s ⑧ effect die. If Mary Rose’s effect die was 
a ⑧ or higher, Adam’s effect die wouldn’t be larger 
than hers, so the GMC would take a ⑧ complication 
without having to spend a ●
Ⓟ.


=== PAGE 26 ===
22 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
BEING TAKEN OUT
Most tests and contests don’t carry the risk of failure so 
dire that it takes a PC out of the scene. It’s up to the GM to 
make it clear from the beginning when it’s a high stakes 
scene where failure may mean being taken out. Some 
examples include:
•	 A PC tests to stay awake after being exposed
to knock-out gas.
•	 A PC initiates a contest with another PC who
they want to knock unconscious.
•	 A deadly trap needs to be overcome before it 
brings doom to all of the occupants in a room.
Often, as GM you present the players with a number of 
options that include some with this potential outcome, 
usually with a commensurate greater reward. Players can 
then decide if the risk is worth it.
Tina’s Sage is presented with two options in a 
scene where she’s dealing with rogue pharmacists 
trying to trigger a worldwide epidemic from their 
computerized lab. She can stay out of sight and try 
to hack the pharmacists’ server, which might delay 
them. Or she can charge in and take the pharmacists 
head-on, which might eliminate their threat entirely, 
but carries a risk that she’ll be taken out by their 
armed response.
When a character is taken out, they may no longer perform 
any test or contest and no longer participates in the scene. 
As the GM you may rule that certain tests are still possible, 
or that a character’s SFX may still be activated. Generally, 
however, a character that’s taken out of a scene has no 
further impact on the scene’s outcome.
BEING TAKEN OUT BY COMPLICATIONS
If a complication attached to a character is somehow 
stepped up beyond ⑫, that character is automatically 
taken out of the scene. Complications that are stepped 
up beyond ⑫ are such a significant hindrance that they 
effectively keep the character from being able to act or 
play any part in the scene.
See “Complications as Consequence” (page 37) for more 
on using complications to take out characters.
RECOVERING IN A SCENE
It’s possible that being taken out of a scene can be reversed 
by other characters in that scene, if they have healing abil­
ities, magic, or the ability to change the circumstances 
that took the character out in the first place. If a char­
acter returns from being taken out, they usually come 
back with at least a ⑥ complication that reflects their 
traumatic experience. See “Trauma” on page 41.
LENKA ŠIMEČKOVÁ


=== PAGE 27 ===
23
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
INTERFERING IN A CONTEST
If you want to get involved in a contest between two other 
characters, your character can attempt to interfere—but it 
costs a ●
Ⓟ and comes with a bit of risk. Usually this means 
your character wants something neither of the other two 
characters wants, or maybe you want the same thing as 
one of them but on your own terms. After each side has 
rolled at least once, you can spend a ●
Ⓟ and describe how 
you’re trying to get between the characters. Roll your dice 
and compare your total to the current total in the contest. 
If you don’t beat the total, they ignore you and the winner 
gives you a complication (or stress) for getting in the way. If 
you beat the total, you’ve stopped the contest in its tracks. 
No one gives in and no one takes any complications—yet.
If both sides are committed to continuing the contest, 
their players (or the GM, if a GMC is one of the contes­
tants) each hand you a ●
Ⓟ and describe how they work 
around, over, or through you to continue their conflict. 
Neither of them can give in until both have rolled again.
You may elect to interfere again by spending another ●
Ⓟ, 
but if either contestant rolls higher than you, they can 
inflict a complication (or stress) on you—that means you 
may get two complications if you don’t roll high enough.
Amanda’s Engineer is arguing with a major GMC,
a rival mechanic, over the rights to upgrade a 
starship. Adam’s Hero decides to interfere, asserting 
his claim that they should do what’s right for the 
upcoming mission. Amanda rolls her dice first, 
getting a total of 12, and Mary Rose rolls next,
getting a 14. Adam spends his ●
Ⓟ and rolls as well, 
beating both of them with a 15. Adam says his Hero 
stands between the two of them and settles the 
argument with his inspirational speech.
Amanda doesn’t want the argument to end, and she 
asks the GM, Mary Rose, if that’s true for her rival, as 
well. Mary Rose says yes, this conversation isn’t over, 
so Amanda and Mary Rose each hand a ●
Ⓟ to Adam 
to continue the argument with a new contest. Now, 
Amanda’s Engineer is yelling past Adam’s Hero to
the mechanic, and the mechanic is yelling back.
Adam decides he’ll sit back and let the technicians 
duke it out, rather than interfering again. Amanda 
and Mary Rose roll again, and Amanda wins with a 19. 
The GMC takes a complication.
If Adam had interfered in the contest between 
Amanda’s Engineer and Mary Rose’s GMC, but failed 
to beat either of their totals in the contest, his Hero 
would just have stood there trying to come between 
the arguing technicians, utterly ignored by their 
heated debate, and taking a complication.
CONTESTS WITH MORE
THAN TWO CHARACTERS
You can use contests as a way to represent all-out scram­
bles for some kind of object, goal, or prize. One player 
initiates the contest, then any other character that wants 
to be involved in the contest can join in, one at a time as 
determined by the GM. The highest roller is the success­
ful character. After the first roll to enter the contest, 
any character that chooses to stay in the contest takes a 
complication if they fail to beat the total. They may other­
wise give in as normal.
CONTEST 1
Adam spends a ●
Ⓟ to interfere in a contest between
Amanda’s Engineer and Mary Rose’s rival mechanic GMC.
AMANDA’S TOTAL 
GMC’S TOTAL
ADAM’S TOTAL
12
14
15
Adam’s Hero beats both of them!
Adam wants to end the argument with his winning roll.
CONTEST 2
Amanda and Mary Rose both decide they don’t want this to be the
end of it, so they each spend a ●
Ⓟ to continue the argument.
AMANDA’S TOTAL 
GMC’S TOTAL
19
16
Amanda wins! Mary Rose’s GMC takes a complication
for losing the second contest.


=== PAGE 28 ===
24 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
TEST AND 
CONTEST MODS
By applying mods to test and contest mechanics, you can 
change how they’re used and implemented. Some of these 
mods make the rules simpler; others add complication.
ACTION-BASED 
RESOLUTION
This mod takes the rules for tests and contests and sort 
of smashes them together. Using this mod, anything a 
player character or GMC does is called an action. If you 
want to carry out an action, you declare it, gather up 
your pool, and roll the dice, just as if you were starting a 
contest. Instead of moving to a back and forth escalation 
like a contest, the action is opposed by a reaction, which 
is either the target of the action rolling their own dice, 
or a difficulty set by the GM rolling difficulty dice. If the 
reaction beats the action’s total, the action fails.
An action-based resolution approach places heavier 
weight on who goes when and the order in which actions 
take place. The scenes are more structured, each player 
tends to take their own turn, and an action order (page 
98) is established to manage this.
Because the action’s dice are always rolled first, before 
difficulty dice or opposing reactions are rolled, action-
based resolution can make actions seem chancy. Players 
may not know whether they should include more dice 
into their totals with ●
Ⓟ. To offset this somewhat, the 
GM’s difficulty total or the reaction total must exceed the 
action’s total for the action to fail.
Amanda’s Engineer and Tina’s Sage are trapped in 
an elevator shaft by killer robots. On Amanda’s turn, 
she uses her action to roll an impromptu bot-hack 
to disable one of the robots, which means she rolls 
her Mental ⑧ + The World is My Workshop ⑧ 
distinction + Operate ⑧ skill. She gets a total of 11 
plus a ⑧ effect die. Mary Rose, the GM, rolls for the 
killer robot’s reaction using the Killer Robot ⑧ 
trait + Murderous Machine ⑧ distinction + Servo 
Motors ⑥ trait and gets a 9 with a ⑥ effect die. 
Amanda’s action total is higher than Mary Rose’s 
reaction total, and her ⑧ effect die is higher than 
the robot’s ⑥ effect die, so the killer robot is taken 
out. (Mary Rose could hand over a ●
Ⓟ to have the 
killer robot take a ⑧ complication instead, but she 
chooses not to.) Amanda picks Tina to go next in the 
action order, probably for the Sage to deal with her 
own killer robot problem.
NATALIA BACETTI
PLAYER
TRAITS USED
DICE ROLL
TOTAL
Amanda
Mental 
The World is
My Workshop 
Operate 
11
Mary Rose
Killer Robot 
Murderous Machine 
Servo Motors 
9
Amanda wins! Since Mary Rose declines to use a ●
Ⓟ to
take a ⑧ complication, the robot is taken out.


=== PAGE 29 ===
25
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
ADD ALL THE DICE
With this mod, all the dice rolled in the dice pool are 
added together for the total, then compared to the oppo­
sition total (which likewise is every die added together). 
With this mod, use either the No Effect Dice or Reroll for 
Effect mods, as adding together all of the dice leaves no 
die for the effect die.
This mod still keeps the rule about hitches. Any die that 
comes up as a 1 isn’t included in the total, and counts as a 
hitch to be activated by the players or the GM, depending 
on who’s rolling.
This mod places a much higher value on adding dice to 
the dice pool, so assets and complications become much 
more potent. Games using this mod likely have charac­
ter files with no more than three trait sets to ensure that 
totals don’t become astronomical.
NO EFFECT DICE
In this mod, effect dice are dropped entirely, and all tests 
and contests have simple success and failure outcomes. 
The degree of success or the measure of the outcome 
remains story-driven and descriptive, rather than being 
represented by a die rating. Any time a test or contest 
should generate a complication or asset, assign a ⑥ and 
step it up with heroic successes.
No effect dice means you can’t compare effect dice to 
modulate the outcomes of contests. High stakes scenes 
result in opponents being taken out unless they spend a 
●
Ⓟ, and low stakes scenes result in opponents taking ⑥ 
complications or having existing complications stepped 
up by one.
REROLL FOR EFFECT
This mod doesn’t use the original die roll to generate the 
effect die; instead the player or GM rerolls their dice pool 
and takes the highest rolling die as the effect die. SFX that 
call for choosing more than one effect die or stepping up 
or down an effect die apply to this new roll. If SFX or other 
mechanics altered or stepped up dice in the pool after 
they were rolled, those effects don’t apply when rerolling; 
pick up the original dice pool and roll it.
STATIC DIFFICULTY
With this mod, players only roll against opposition dice 
pools in a contest, not in a test. When a player rolls in a 
test, the difficulty is a static target number instead of a 
difficulty die.
Static difficulty is based on this difficulty dice chart:
3
7
11
15
19
Very Easy
Challenging
Very Hard
Easy
Hard
If the PC has a complication that would add to the oppo­
sition, the complication die is rolled and added to the
static difficulty.
Adam’s Hero is trying to clear away a fallen stone
slab from the tunnel he’s exploring. Mary Rose, the 
GM, has determined that this is Hard. Adam’s Hero
is also suffering from a Broken Leg ⑩ complication.
Mary Rose rolls the ⑩ and adds it to the Hard 
difficulty of 15.
Hard difficulty set by Mary Rose for 
Adam’s Hero
Static difficulty set by Mary Rose for 
Adam’s Hero
Mary Rose’s roll from the Broken Leg 
complication suffered by Adam’s Hero 
from an earlier contest
15
20
CLASSIC CONVERSION NOTE
This is essentially the same difficulty system presented in Classic 
Cortex. You may want to experiment with SFX and drawbacks 
that make static difficulty easier and harder by using them as 
fixed numbers rather than dice. A quick and easy conversion is 
to divide the maximum result of the die in half and apply it as a 
fixed number instead of rolling the die. Thus, a 
 is a +2, a 
 is 
a +3, and so on.
The Hero Dice mod (page 30) complements this mod, 
allowing the players to spend hero dice to help over­
come the impact of complications. With a static difficulty, 
there’s no option for the GM to roll any hitches, unless 
you decide that rolling a 1 on a complication die would 
count. GMs are encouraged to let players spend hero 
dice to achieve the same outcome; i.e., instead of spend­
ing a ●
Ⓟ to activate a 1 on a GM’s dice, you spend a hero 
die and either eliminate a complication (if the hero die 
spent is equal to or greater than the complication) or step 
a complication down by one (if the hero die spent is less 
than the complication).
GMs still roll dice for their GMCs as normal and can even 
roll against a static difficulty if they aren’t opposed by 
another GMC or a player.


=== PAGE 30 ===
26 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
TRAITS
Each PC’s character file is mostly a list of traits and related 
game stats. Traits define a character and how they interact 
with the world they live in. Traits paint a picture of who a 
character is and what they can do, not just in terms of their 
skills and abilities but also their personality, background, 
or aspirations.
Each trait has a die rating, usually between ④ and ⑫. 
When that trait comes into play, the player rolls that die 
as part of their dice pool.
Many different types of traits are used in Cortex Prime 
games. These include (but are not limited to) attributes, 
distinctions, skills, affiliations, relationships, powers, 
roles, and values. Read more about which traits you might 
use in your own Cortex Prime game in the Prime Characters 
chapter (page 44). Choosing which traits to use defines
how a Cortex Prime game is played more than almost 
anything else.
TRAIT SETS
Any collection of traits that belong to the same basic type 
is assumed to be part of a trait set. Attributes is a trait set, 
as is skills. The rule of thumb in Cortex Prime is that you 
may only add one trait from any given trait set to a dice 
pool without added cost. If you want to include more, it 
costs a ●
Ⓟ. Some Cortex Prime games might limit this 
use of ●
Ⓟ to specific trait sets, such as skills or attributes.
Every Cortex Prime game needs at least two prime sets 
in addition to distinctions. These are the source of almost 
every dice pool used in tests and contests. Attributes 
and skills are common prime sets, which means any 
test or contest must include one attribute and one skill. 
Resources and specialties, on the other hand, are not 
generally considered prime sets.
A character may be defined by as few as three and as many 
as six or seven trait sets, depending on the game.
TEMPORARY TRAITS
In play, characters may gain temporary traits, which last 
for a short time—a scene, or maybe a session. Temporary 
traits can also be assigned directly to a scene or to a loca­
tion, and either go away when circumstances make them 
irrelevant (like a Flaming Torch ⑥ once it’s doused in a 
lake) or when some other time limit is reached.
Assets and complications are the most common examples 
of temporary traits.
DISTINCTIONS:
THE UNIVERSAL TRAIT SET
Every Cortex Prime game includes distinctions. They’re 
sort of like your character’s “elevator pitch:” reading all of 
them should tell anyone a lot about who the character is, 
whether they describe personality quirks, backgrounds, 
or the character’s role in the world. Distinctions are 
considered a universal prime set, so regardless of what 
sets are used in your game, every character should have 
three distinctions broad and varied enough that you can 
narratively justify including one in almost any dice pool. 
Some Cortex Prime games expand further on their role in 
the game (or how many of them a character has). Avoid 
removing them from your game unless you have an equiv­
alent universal descriptive trait set to take their place and 
serve their function.
A NOTE ABOUT EXAMPLES
Cortex Prime is designed to be modular and customizable, and no prime 
set, aside from distinctions, is a default for the purposes of playing 
the game. That said, when providing examples of how the rules work,
I often default to an action-adventure approach that’s common to most 
roleplaying games and is the easiest to grasp for players coming from 
those games.
The prime sets for examples are attributes, skills, and distinctions. Just 
because I use these in examples doesn’t mean all Cortex Prime games 
should or must have those trait sets. In fact, the three Spotlight settings 
in Prime Settings don’t use all of these trait sets. The only trait set that 
should belong in every Cortex Prime game is distinctions; even then, 
it’s your game at the end of the day, so if you’ve got a good equivalent, 
more power to you.
ANTHONY
“ROBOTPENCIL”
JONES


=== PAGE 31 ===
27
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
PLOT POINTS
Plot points (●
Ⓟ) are a way for players to affect the plot 
beyond the roll of the dice. Plot points can be spent to give 
players more dice, make the dice they have more power­
ful, or activate certain traits or special effects (SFX) on a 
character file. You need a way to keep track of ●
Ⓟ. You can 
write them as tally marks on your character file, or you 
can use poker chips or some other kind of token (pennies, 
paperclips, glass beads… you get the idea).
Every player starts a game session with at least one ●
Ⓟ. 
Unspent ●
Ⓟ are carried over from session to session, but 
it’s best to spend ●
Ⓟ when the opportunity arises—it’s not 
hard to get more during play.
In some of the earliest Cortex-powered RPGs, ●
Ⓟ were 
mostly used just to add dice to the dice pool or increase 
the total after the dice were rolled. Cortex Prime uses ●
Ⓟ 
more broadly, and mods (page 13) give you the opportu­
nity to tweak ●
Ⓟ to make them more or less influential 
in your game.
PLOT POINTS
AND META-REALITY
For some players, ●
Ⓟ and other meta-fictional mechanics 
are a way to step outside of the characters and the setting 
and impose some authorial control over the unfolding 
story. Other players struggle with mechanics that don’t 
seem to have any direct connection to the fictional reality 
of the game setting. If it helps to think of ●
Ⓟ as “luck” 
or “faith” or something else that has a kind of quasi-real 
existence in the setting, then call them that! ●
Ⓟ are an 
extension of the dice mechanics, serving the same kind 
of role in the game as dice pools and so forth.
THE GAME MODERATOR 
AND PLOT POINTS
Unless mods are applied, the GM has two pools of ●
Ⓟ: the 
bank and the pile.
THE BANK
At the start of each session, the GM gets a ●
Ⓟ per player 
in the game to spend on GMCs. These ●
Ⓟ are solely for 
keeping GMCs from being taken out in a fight, for using 
SFX, or other GMC-related things. The same bank of ●
Ⓟ 
is shared by all of the GMCs in play; they don’t each keep 
track of their own plot points.
When the GM spends these ●
Ⓟ, they go to the pile instead 
of to the player who was affected by the roll, just as if a 
PC had spent the ●
Ⓟ on the roll. The GM can add more 
●
Ⓟ to the bank by activating GMC SFX, including using 
distinctions as a ④ instead of a ⑧.
THE PILE
In addition to the limited pool of points set aside in the 
bank, the GM has an unlimited number of ●
Ⓟ to give to 
the players when appropriate. The GM uses this pool to 
purchase complications when the players roll hitches or 
to hand over ●
Ⓟ to the players when an SFX calls for it. 
It’s called the pile because if you’re using physical tokens 
to keep track of them, it’s best to just make a big pile of 
those tokens in the middle of the table. Most of the time, 
when players or the GM spend ●
Ⓟ, they return to this pile.
JESSICA FONG


=== PAGE 32 ===
28 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
SPEND A 
SPEND 
 
SPEND 
 
 
Create a 
complication
Create 2 
complications
or
Create a 
 and
a 
 complication
Create 2 
complications and
a 
 complication
EARNING PLOT POINTS
AS A PLAYER
There are several ways for players to earn ●
Ⓟ during play. 
Unless otherwise stated, these ●
Ⓟ come out of the pile, not 
the GM’s bank. If you earn a ●
Ⓟ because of a die roll, such 
as a hitch, you can’t use it until your die roll is resolved 
(so you can’t roll a 1, get a ●
Ⓟ, and then spend it to keep 
more dice in your total).
Complications: The GM may hand over a ●
Ⓟ from the 
pile to activate a complication when players roll hitches. 
Complications start at ⑥, but additional hitches in the 
same roll step up the complication without the GM 
needing to spend additional ●
Ⓟ. The GM may choose to 
create multiple complications if there is more than one 
hitch, but each new complication requires handing over a 
●
Ⓟ. If all your dice are hitches, that’s a botch. Your GM can 
create a complication without handing over a ●
Ⓟ, stepped 
up for each hitch past the first.
Tina rolls four hitches. Mary Rose could hand over a 
single ●
Ⓟ to Tina and create a ⑫ complication
(⑥ from the activated hitch, stepped up three
times to ⑫ for the three other hitches).
Or, she might hand Tina two ●
Ⓟ and create two ⑧ 
complications (⑥ from each activated hitch, each 
one stepped up by one for an additional hitch).
If Tina had rolled a hitch on all five dice, Mary Rose 
could have taken her out of the scene entirely with 
that botch: a free ⑥ complication, stepped up four 
more times, beyond ⑫.
Roleplaying: The GM is always free to hand out ●
Ⓟ for 
remarkable moments in play, including making everyone 
laugh, doing something truly heroic and in character, and 
so forth. This is something that each table agrees to and 
isn’t mandated by the rules.
Using ④ in your roll: If you include a ④ complication 
(or stress, if you’re using those rules) in your dice pool, 
you get a ●
Ⓟ, just like you would if you used the Hinder 
SFX from a distinction. This does not apply when you’re 
forced to use ④ rated skills, attributes, or other traits in 
your dice pool. On the plus side, you’re more likely to roll 
a hitch on a ④, which could lead to a ●
Ⓟ.
SPENDING PLOT POINTS
AS A PLAYER
You can spend ●
Ⓟ for a variety of benefits, such as includ­
ing more dice in your total, activating some SFX, creating 
new assets, and using hero dice. Remember, you can only 
spend ●
Ⓟ you’ve earned from a die roll after your die roll 
is resolved and the total announced.
Activate SFX: Some SFX must be activated by spending a 
●
Ⓟ. These effects only last for the duration of the roll you’re 
using it on; once you do something else, the effect must 
be activated again.
Add more dice: Before you roll, you can spend a ●
Ⓟ to 
include more dice from a trait set in your dice pool, so 
long as you can give a reasonable explanation as to why. 
This includes adding more than one skill, more than one 
attribute, or perhaps another power.
Activate an Opportunity: If the GM rolls a 1 on their dice, 
that’s a type of hitch called an opportunity. Players can 
spend a ●
Ⓟ to activate opportunities to either step down 
an existing complication or step up an existing asset. 
Some SFX may allow other uses for opportunities.
Create a relationship: When using relationship traits, you 
can spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a ⑥ relationship with a charac­
ter that you don’t already have a relationship with. This 
relationship goes away at the end of the session unless 
you use growth or XP to keep it around.
Create a temporary asset: You can create a ⑥ tempo­
rary asset by spending a ●
Ⓟ. This asset lasts for the rest 
of the scene. If you spend two ●
Ⓟ, you can keep it for the 
rest of the session—assuming nothing happens to remove 
or eliminate it. This allows you to give some dramatic 
weight to an item (Length of Pipe ⑥) or part of the scenery 
(Unlocked Door ⑥), or create a new GMC (Handyman ⑥). 
The temporary asset only helps you, unless you give it to 
somebody else when you create it, or spend another ●
Ⓟ 
to make it free for anyone to use.
Giving in: If you give in during a contest and let your 
opponent succeed rather than rolling to beat their total, 
you earn a ●
Ⓟ. You only get this ●
Ⓟ if you’ve already rolled 
at least once in the contest; you don’t get a ●
Ⓟ if someone 
starts a contest and you choose not to oppose it.
No Bank Mod: If the optional No Bank mod is used, 
players may earn ●
Ⓟ when the GM spends a ●
Ⓟ on a GMC.
SFX: Some SFX (including the default Hinder SFX for all 
distinctions) give you a ●
Ⓟ.
TINA’S BAD ROLL


=== PAGE 33 ===
29
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
PLOT POINT 
MODS
These rules alter the way the plot point flow works in the 
game, including how they’re spent and tracked by players 
and GMs.
STARTING PLOT POINTS
The rule of a single ●
Ⓟ per character is a reasonable default 
in all cases, but you can mix it up. You might have players 
start with more than one ●
Ⓟ as a default, or you might 
say that every session, all players get a ●
Ⓟ on top of any 
remaining from the last session.
Alternately, you may decide that at the beginning of each 
session, all players roll dice to determine how many 
●
Ⓟ they start with. For instance, every player could 
roll ④ and get as many ●
Ⓟ as the result of that die.
For a more predictable spread of ●
Ⓟ around your table, 
have each player pick up all of the dice in one of their 
prime sets, such as attributes, relationships, or roles. They 
roll this dice pool, add two dice together for a total, and 
compare totals with the other players. The player with the 
highest total gets three ●
Ⓟ, the one with the lowest gets a 
single ●
Ⓟ, and the rest get two.
NO BANK
With this mod, the GM doesn’t have a private supply of 
●
Ⓟ. When the players spend ●
Ⓟ, they go into the big pile 
in the middle of the table, in front of the GM. When the 
GM spends ●
Ⓟ in a roll against a player, they slide a ●
Ⓟ 
from the pile to that player. 
Players can’t use ●
Ⓟ they just earned when the GMCs 
spent the ●
Ⓟ to improve their current rolls or activate 
SFX, so they should keep those ●
Ⓟ separate until the end 
of the current roll.
Using this mod, a major GMC can’t earn a ●
Ⓟ when a 
distinction is used as a ④, so the GM can bank a ⑥ for 
that character and drop it into a future action as needed. 
There’s no limit to how many of these dice a major char­
acter can save up, but regardless of how many are used 
on a roll, the GM may still only use two dice for a total.
Include more results: After any roll, you may spend a ●
Ⓟ 
to include more results out of the dice pool you just rolled. 
This way, your total may be three, four, or five dice added 
together. The only limit to how many results you may add 
to your total is how many dice you rolled to begin with 
and how many ●
Ⓟ you have available.
Interfere in a contest: If you want to interfere in a contest 
that’s already underway, you can spend a ●
Ⓟ to join in.
If the other contestants lose to you, they can give you ●
Ⓟ 
to renew the contest for another round.
Keep an extra effect die: You can spend a ●
Ⓟ to keep 
an extra effect die, using it to create an additional asset, 
complication, or stress. You can’t use this if you have no 
dice left over from your roll.
Roll a hero die: With the Hero Dice mod (page 30), you 
can spend a ●
Ⓟ to roll a banked hero die and add it to your 
total, even if your opponent has already rolled their dice.
Share an asset: If you’ve created a temporary asset by 
spending a ●
Ⓟ or by making a test (page 35), you can 
spend a ●
Ⓟ to make it “open” for other characters in the 
scene to use in their dice pools.
Stay in the fight: When you would be taken out, you may 
spend a ●
Ⓟ to take a complication instead. The size of the 
complication is equal to the effect die of the opposing dice 
pool. If you’re using the Life Points mod (page 43), you can 
spend a ●
Ⓟ to stay conscious or active in the scene when 
your life points exceed your threshold.
SPENDING PLOT POINTS
AS THE GAME MODERATOR
●
Ⓟ can be spent by the GM to include more dice in a 
GMC’s character’s total, to activate a GMC’s SFX, and to 
help a GMC avoid being taken out in a conflict. 
Include more results: After any roll involving a GMC, 
the GM may spend a ●
Ⓟ from the bank to include more 
results out of the dice pool just rolled. This way, the GM’s 
total may be three, four, or five dice added together. The 
only limit to how many results the GM may add to the 
total is how many dice the GM rolled to begin with and 
how many ●
Ⓟ are left in the bank.
Activate SFX: Some of the GMC’s SFX may have effects 
that must be activated by spending a ●
Ⓟ from the bank. 
Any effect that’s activated like this only lasts for the dura­
tion of the roll; once the GMC does something else, the 
effect must be activated again.
Avoid being taken out: The GM may spend a ●
Ⓟ from the 
bank to prevent a GMC from being taken out and instead 
take a complication. The size of the complication is equal 
to the effect die from the opposing dice pool.
Note: The more 
 a player starts out with, the more likely 
they are to spend them at the beginning of a session, rather 
than at the end or at a climactic point. This isn’t a good or 
bad thing, but it’s useful to keep in mind.


=== PAGE 34 ===
30 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
HERO DICE
Using this mod, the primary benefit of a heroic success is 
the creation of hero dice. On a heroic success, you may 
bank a die equal to the highest rolling die in the opposing 
dice pool. These banked dice are called hero dice, and 
players may save as many of them as they like. In games 
that use this mod, there’s a space on the character file 
to indicate how many hero dice you’ve earned and what 
size they are.
In some Cortex games, the GM might rule that players 
can only bank one hero die of any given size. In such a 
game, the character file has spaces to mark off each of the 
five die sizes (④ through ⑫). You may opt to step down a 
hero die you earn from a heroic success to the next lowest 
available die on your sheet if you already banked a hero 
die of that size.
Using this mod does not negate the standard function of 
a heroic success, which is to step up an effect die. In other 
words, a heroic success not only earns the player a hero 
die, it steps up their effect die as well.
USING HERO DICE
To use a hero die, you spend a ●
Ⓟ and roll the die, adding it 
to your total in any test or contest. You may do this at any 
time after rolling the dice to get a total, even if you rolled 
first and the opposition rolled their own dice. It must be 
done before the GM announces the outcome of the roll. 
You might be so successful that you get another heroic 
success and earn another hero die. Whatever happens, 
erase the hero die you used from your character file.
Tina wants her Sage to translate a mystic scroll using 
her extensive knowledge of arcane languages. Mary 
Rose sets the difficulty on this test with a roll of 12. 
Tina only rolls a 10. That would usually be a failure, 
but Tina chooses to spend a ●
Ⓟ to roll a ⑧ hero die 
she banked earlier. The die comes up a 4, which kicks 
Tina’s total up to 14. Good enough for a success!
Hero dice can backfire. If the die comes up 1—a hitch—
the GM may introduce a complication as if you had rolled 
a 1 on any other die. However, instead of accepting a ●
Ⓟ 
from the GM, you may choose to take back your hero die 
and not add it to your total. You still lose the ●
Ⓟ you spent 
to activate it.
Hero dice require ●
Ⓟ to activate them because adding dice 
after you roll your test or contest is a powerful advantage.
GIBY JOSEPH


=== PAGE 35 ===
This is one of the few cases in Cortex Prime where you 
have the ability to roll more dice to add to your total after 
you’ve rolled your dice pool.
Hero dice don’t stick around after they’re used for a roll. 
During a contest, if your opponent beats your total even 
after you added a hero die to it, you can’t use the same 
hero die on your next roll.
THE GM AND HERO DICE
The GM doesn’t pick up or use hero dice. If the GM rolls 5 
or more than the player on their rolls, they instead remove 
a hero die from the PC in question equal to or less than 
the highest rolling die on the GM’s roll. If the PC had no 
hero dice banked yet or no hero dice of equal or lesser size, 
nothing happens. Either way, the GM narrates something 
to justify the bad guy upstaging the PC in that moment!
Adam’s Hero has a ⑧ and a ⑩ hero dice banked 
from previous scenes. During a duel with his nemesis, 
the Beast, Adam rolls a 6 on his dice so he spends 
his last remaining ●
Ⓟ to add the ⑩ hero die to his 
total, raising it by 6 points to a 12. Mary Rose, playing 
the Beast as a GMC, beats this with a 17. That’s a 
heroic success, ending the duel immediately with the 
Beast as a victor! However, Mary Rose doesn’t get 
a hero die from this. Instead, she looks at her dice, 
notes that her highest rolling 
die was a ⑩, and removes 
Adam’s banked ⑧ hero
die instead.
HERO DICE AS PLOT POINTS
With this mod, there’s no additional cost to use hero dice 
if the player chooses to include them in their dice pool 
before they roll; they simply erase the die from their char­
acter file and add it into their dice pool like any other trait 
die. If you go this route, it’s simply another die in your pool 
that might end up contributing to your total. The hero die 
may also be spent in place of a ●
Ⓟ in any situation where a 
●
Ⓟ is applicable, and you don’t have any. This also means 
spending it, so it’s erased from your character file.
Some SFX may specify the use of hero dice instead of ●
Ⓟ, 
usually when the SFX is particularly strong. The size of the 
hero die doesn’t matter unless specified. You might have 
an SFX that states: when you are in a tense or dangerous 
situation, spend a hero die to remove a complication of 
the same size die or smaller. This is a fairly potent effect, 
but it’s limited by the use of a hero die (and a contextual 
requirement) rather than a ●
Ⓟ.
HERO DICE AS EFFECT DICE
With this mod, hero dice may be spent to substitute for 
low effect dice from dice rolls. Used this way, you spend 
a ●
Ⓟ and use the hero die as the effect die instead of one 
of the dice from the roll. A heroic success does not step up 
this new effect die. That only applies to effect dice sourced 
from the die roll itself.
After Adam wins a later duel with the Beast, he only 
has a ④ left in his dice pool to use as his effect die. 
If he had a hero die banked, such as a ⑧, he could 
spend a ●
Ⓟ to switch out the ④ with the ⑧.
If you’ve got some kind of effect active that lets you keep 
more effect dice from your roll, such as an SFX, you can 
spend ●
Ⓟ to switch out any or all of those effect dice with 
hero dice; it just costs a ●
Ⓟ for each switch, and you must 
have enough hero dice banked to do it.


=== PAGE 36 ===
32 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
DOOM POOL
The doom pool is a mod that serves as a combination of 
ambient threat level, GM resource, and pacing mechanic. 
The doom pool is sometimes called the trouble pool, the 
danger pool, or some other thematic title.
When the GM has a doom pool:
•	 They do not have a bank of ●
Ⓟ.
•	 Players earn and spend their ●
Ⓟ directly into
and out of a central pile.
•	 The GM spends dice out of the doom pool
instead of using their own ●
Ⓟ.
At the beginning of each session, the GM starts with a 
doom pool of at least ⑥⑥. If the session is of global or 
cosmic scale, the pool may start with 3 or 4 dice. If the 
session is a major breakpoint in a campaign, the size of 
these starting dice might be ⑧ or even ⑩.
The doom pool replaces difficulty dice for all tests. To set 
the difficulty, the GM picks up some or all the dice in the 
doom pool and rolls them, taking two of the dice results 
and adding them together, as normal. The GM can spend a 
die not used in the total and add its result to the total; this 
spent die is removed from the doom pool. The remaining 
dice, including the two that were added together for the 
total, remain in the doom pool.
The GM may spend a die from the doom pool to add it to 
a GMC’s dice pool during a contest, before the dice pool 
is rolled. This die is removed from the doom pool and 
doesn’t go back in once the GMC’s roll is resolved.
Doom dice may also be spent like ●
Ⓟ, where a ⑥ from 
the doom pool is equivalent to a single ●
Ⓟ. This usually 
happens when activating a GMC SFX or avoiding being 
taken out of a fight. If the doom pool only has larger dice 
in it, the next highest die must be spent in place of the ⑥.
The doom pool increases when the GM activates hitches 
rolled by players. Instead of adding a complication to the 
table, the GM adds a die of the same size as the one that 
rolled the hitch to their doom pool. Alternately, the GM 
can use a smaller die to step up an equal or larger existing 
die in the doom pool by one step.
Amanda rolls a 1 on a ⑩ in her dice pool. Mary Rose 
adds a ⑩ to the doom pool and Amanda gets a ●
Ⓟ. 
Mary Rose could alternately choose to step up a ⑩ 
that’s already in the doom pool by one step to ⑫.
The doom pool can be used for additional scene 
effects, depending on the game. Some of the most 
common uses are:
Create a complication, asset, or scene distinc­
tion: Spend a die from the doom pool and create 
a complication or asset attached to the scene 
equal in size to the die spent. Or, spend at least 
a ⑧ and add a distinction to the scene that may 
be used by players and GMCs alike.
Interrupt the action order: Spend a die from the 
doom pool equal to or greater in size than the 
largest combat or senses-related trait of the PC 
whose turn is up next. One of the GM’s own GMCs 
gets to go instead, and the GM then picks who 
goes afterward (not necessarily the player who
was interrupted).
Add a new extra: Spend a die from the doom pool 
and create an extra with a single trait rated at the 
size of the die spent.
Introduce a minor or major GMC: If a GMC who 
isn’t present in the scene could conceivably show 
up, spend a die from the doom pool equal to that 
GMC’s highest rated trait and drop them into the 
scene, ready to act when the action order gets to 
them (which could be right away, if the GM is the 
one deciding who goes next).
Split the group: Spend a ⑩ or a ⑫ from the 
doom pool and some environmental or narrative 
event takes place that divides the group into two 
(minimum one PC in each new group). The PCs 
have to spend time reuniting their group, which 
may lead to more problems.
End the scene immediately: Spend ⑫ ⑫ from 
the doom pool and cut the scene off right there 
before it’s resolved, with the GM deciding how it 
ends. Usually, the scenes should play out until 
there’s a reasonable ending point, but this way 
the GM can just smash cut to a new scene with 
plot threads dangling. Or stage an auto-win by
the villains.
LIMITED DOOM POOL
In this mod, the difficulty is determined as usual 
based on the situation’s overall difficulty and by 
any GMC traits that factor into it. Doom dice are 
then spent out of the doom pool to add dice to 
the difficulty or to include more dice into the 
total after the dice are rolled, as per the stan­
dard doom pool rules. In this mod, doom dice 
continue to replace ●
Ⓟ for the GM.
REZA AFSHAR
DOOM POOL
OPTION 1
OPTION 2
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 37 ===
33
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
CRISIS POOLS
With this mod, the doom pool mechanic represents multi­
ple localized problems. Each of these smaller problems is 
its own pool of dice and spends dice just like a doom pool 
would, but only for things that the problem might be able 
to influence. These are often called crisis pools to distin­
guish them from the larger, session-wide doom pool.
Crisis pools can be directly affected by the actions of PCs. 
In this way, they are a lot like mobs (page 117). To elimi­
nate a die in a crisis pool, a player makes a test opposed 
by the crisis pool. If they beat the crisis pool’s difficulty, 
they can apply an effect die of at least one step larger to 
the crisis die they want to get rid of. This takes it out of the 
crisis pool entirely. If they don’t have a die that’s larger, 
they can use one of the same size or smaller to step down 
a crisis die instead. Crisis pools reduced to zero dice are 
no longer problems.
Mary Rose creates a crisis pool that represents 
a forest fire, and a crisis pool that represents a 
runaway train loaded with hazardous materials. She 
assigns ⑥⑥⑥ to the forest fire and ⑧ ⑧ to 
the train. Any time the players make tests involving 
the forest fire, the forest fire crisis pool is used to 
oppose them. Similarly, if they’re trying to stop the 
train, they deal with the train’s crisis pool by testing 
against it and removing those ⑧ with effect dice. 
If the players roll hitches, Mary Rose can hand over 
a ●
Ⓟ to activate the hitch and add a die of the same 
size to a crisis pool.
You can use both crisis pools and the doom pool, spend­
ing dice directly from the doom pool to create a new crisis 
pool. Dice spent in this manner go from the doom pool 
to the crisis pool, thus reducing the overall doom of the 
session but creating specific, localized situations the 
players can directly affect.
STARTING 
RATING
     
 
DICE ROLL
FOREST
TRAIN
If PC succeeds and 
effect die is 
 
 
If PC succeeds and 
effect die is 
 
If PC rolls a hitch
on a 
     
 
 
Note: You can have both crisis pools and mobs, because they 
perform different functions; mobs can have SFX, or additional 
traits, whereas crisis pools are just pools of dice. Or, you can 
have crisis pools replace mobs, and create a crisis pool like
Angry Villagers ⑧ ⑧ ⑧. For more on mobs, see page 117 
in Prime Sessions. For more on crisis pools, see Hammerheads 
on page 158.


=== PAGE 38 ===
34 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
ASSETS AND 
COMPLICATIONS
Not all traits are listed on a PC or GMC’s character file. 
Some traits are temporary, reflecting conditions, circum­
stances, or objects that help (assets) or that make things 
difficult (complications). These, too, are given die ratings 
and are included in dice pools where appropriate. 
Both assets and complications are created by the GM and 
the players on-the-fly, representing the situational advan­
tages and disadvantages that the group will encounter 
during a session. Assets are short-lived, lasting only for 
a scene unless players are willing to spend additional 
resources to keep them around; complications are sticky 
and last until the PC has either overcome them or the 
complication is irrelevant.
ASSETS
Assets are included in a player’s dice pool when they’re 
applicable and helpful. Some examples:
•	 Press Pass, which helps a PC slip into a restricted 
location without being stopped.
•	 Thermal Jacket, which makes surviving in the icy 
cold much easier.
They can be environmental, too:
•	 Footholds Everywhere is an asset that would 
help a PC climb a cliff face.
•	 Handy Info Kiosk is an asset that any PC might 
use to look something up.
CREATING ASSETS
During the game, you can spend a ●
Ⓟ and create a ⑥ 
asset with a name you come up with.
Some SFX allow for assets that start with a ⑧ die rating. 
These are called stunts.
Assets larger than the standard ⑥ asset or ⑧ stunt can 
be created by making a test against a difficulty set by the 
GM, even if the PC has run out of ●
Ⓟ. See “Test-Created 
Assets” on the next page.
Assets last until the end of the scene, unless something 
in the story makes them no longer relevant, or they’re 
stepped down or eliminated.
During play, you can add as many of your fictionally 
appropriate assets to a dice pool as you’d like. Since you 
spent a ●
Ⓟ for the asset itself when you created it, you don’t 
need to spend a second time to use it.
Once created, assets are largely static. You can step them 
up with GM opportunities, or with SFX that permit you to 
do so. You can also spend a ●
Ⓟ to make the asset last for 
the rest of the session. If you don’t spend the additional 
●
Ⓟ, the asset goes away at the end of the scene.
An asset is assumed to belong to the character of the 
player that created it, and by default can’t be included in 
anyone else’s pool. If you create an asset to help another 
character (another PC or a GMC), you can declare the 
ownership of the asset to be that character instead. In 
this case, the other player (or the GM) may use it in their 
character’s dice pool and you may not. You may spend an 
additional ●
Ⓟ to declare an asset to be open and usable 
by any character in the scene (including GMCs); this is 
in addition to any ●
Ⓟ used to make it last longer than
one scene.
FREEFORM ASSETS AND COMPLICATIONS
While narrative twists and turns move the story forward 
after rolls, sometimes successes and failures lead to new 
assets or complications. When the situation calls for it, 
the GM may allow a successful test to create a ⑥ asset 
for free. A player may then spend a ●
Ⓟ to make that asset 
last for the session rather than just the scene. 
Similarly, the GM may rule that a failed test leads to a ⑥ 
complication. Like other complications, the character can 
attempt to remove these complications through a recov­
ery test or wait for the complication to wear off.


=== PAGE 39 ===
TEST-CREATED ASSETS
Players can create assets greater than ⑥ and without 
spending ●
Ⓟ by making a test. The player declares what 
their character does to create the asset and assembles an 
appropriate dice pool. The GM rolls to set the difficulty, 
usually with something average like ⑥⑥. The effect die 
of the test becomes the die rating of the asset.
The GM may set a cap on the size of the assets generated in 
this fashion by setting the difficulty dice to that die rating. 
The asset created may not be larger than this die cap.
Mary Rose sets a cap of ⑩ on the die rating for an 
asset created by Tina’s Sage character, who is trying 
to discover dirt on a crime boss. This suggests that 
there simply isn’t enough evidence to justify a ⑫ 
asset under any circumstances. The difficulty dice 
are set to ⑩ ⑩, Mary Rose adds a ⑧ for the crime 
boss’ trait of Plays Cards Close to His Chest ⑧, 
and the dice are rolled to set the difficulty. If Tina 
beats the difficulty, even if her effect die is a ⑫, the 
size of the asset remains capped at ⑩.
With a successful test (you beat the difficulty), your PC 
gains some crucial information or gathers some useful 
intel. If you spend a ●
Ⓟ after you succeed at your test, 
you can bank the asset until you need it, give it to another 
character, or keep it for longer.
With a failed test, you don’t gain any useful advantage.
If you don’t beat the difficulty set by the GM, it’s business 
as normal, essentially. If there are complications, they 
generally represent the consequences of poking around 
places trying to find stuff out, such as Enhanced Security, 
I’m Being Followed, Skittish Bystanders, Tripped Alarms.
THE LOGIC OF ASSETS
If a PC picks up a crowbar to beat up some gangsters but 
doesn’t spend a ●
Ⓟ, should they still get an asset? After 
all, they’ve still got a weapon, right?
Well, no. Here’s the thing—the PC is one of the stars of 
the story. If they get into a fight, they use whatever’s on 
hand to their best advantage—that’s just a given. Picking 
up the crowbar, going after the weakest guy, or looking 
scary, this is all assumed to be part of kicking ass and 
taking names—and having a high rating in Fight or Shoot.
Spending the ●
Ⓟ doesn’t magically make the crowbar they 
picked up into something that’s more dangerous than 
some other weapon. Instead, spending that ●
Ⓟ makes the 
statement that “this crowbar matters.” When they tell the 
story of the fight, it’s “that time I beat up a gangster with a 
crowbar” rather than just another fight where they picked 
up whatever was on hand.
This is equally true for almost any kind of weapon or tool. 
If it exists in the story, if it’s something the GM or players 
are using as part of their description, then it should be a 
part of narrating the outcome of a test or contest, but it 
doesn’t confer any more dice unless it’s turned into an 
asset by spending a ●
Ⓟ or some other way.
In short: most objects in the game are color, setting, or 
flavor, until they get a die rating and become an asset.
CLUES AS ASSETS
Anytime a PC wants to get a read on somebody, case a 
scene, spot something out of the ordinary, or generally 
just use their senses, they’re creating an asset. 
The GM usually calls for the roll, though it’s just 
as valid for you to ask for it. The difficulty for an 
asset test is set by rolling a straight ⑥⑥—unless 
the GM decides otherwise. Your dice pool for the 
test is assembled from appropriate traits related 
to senses or perception.
GM’S ROLL
DIFFICULTY
15
KINIXUKI
TINA’S RESULTS 
TOTAL
ASSET CREATED
19
Evidence Asset 
17
Evidence Asset 
13
None


=== PAGE 40 ===
36 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
COMPLICATIONS
Complications go into the opposition’s dice pool and 
make it harder to succeed. (Adding dice to the opposi­
tion is preferred to removing dice from the dice pool.) 
Complications might include things like:
•	 Extra-Alert Security
•	 Slippery Floors
•	 Broken Leg
If your opponent has a complication attached to them, 
you can use it when you oppose them if the complication 
makes sense as something that would hinder or get in 
your opponent’s way. Adding a complication to your dice 
pool doesn’t cost anything. There’s no real limit to how 
many complications you can add in this way, or how many 
complications you can be saddled with.
DOUBLE JEOPARDY
Generally, only one complication applies to a specific 
hindrance or problem. You likely wouldn’t suffer from 
a Broken Leg and a Sore Leg complication at the same 
time—the first complication assumes the other. If 
you want to make a complication worse, it should be
stepped up.
CREATING COMPLICATIONS
If you roll a 1—a hitch—on any of your dice, the GM 
always has the option of introducing a complication. 
Whether the PC succeeds or fails at the test or contest, 
a complication means something else has gone wrong, 
making life difficult.
When the GM introduces a complication, the player gets a 
●
Ⓟ from the GM’s pile; aside from distinctions, this is the 
main way for players to gain ●
Ⓟ. The GM notes down the 
complication, giving it a descriptive name—sticky notes 
or index cards work well for this—with a ⑥ die rating. 
For the rest of the session, if that complication comes into 
play, the GM gets to roll an extra ⑥.
If more than one hitch comes up on your dice, the GM 
may choose to step up the complication by one step for 
each additional hitch.
Adam rolls three hitches on his dice. The 
complication he gets when Mary Rose activates
the hitches starts out as ⑩. However, Mary Rose
still only pays a single ●
Ⓟ, even though it was
stepped up twice for the additional hitches. 
BURAK KIRK
ADAM’S ROLL
GM’S COST
RESULT
 complication
 complication
 complication


=== PAGE 41 ===
37
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
The GM may also choose to step up an existing complica­
tion instead of introducing a new complication, putting 
pressure on players who are locked in a fight or trying to 
escape the authorities.
Amanda incurs a Wanted by State Police ⑥ 
complication when she rolls a single hitch, but
Mary Rose steps that complication up to a ⑩
when her next roll includes two more hitches.
These complications should represent the PC’s injury or 
setback, such as Broken Arm or Identity Theft.
The die rating of this complication is equal to the effect 
die of the opposition. So, if the GMC’s attack roll had a ⑩ 
effect die, then the complication starts out as a ⑩. If the 
complication comes from something other than a die roll, 
it begins at a default ⑥.
The GM can decide that you must step up an existing 
complication by one when you take this option or when 
you roll a hitch on a subsequent roll of the dice, if the 
existing complication is equal to or larger than the die 
rating of the new complication. Characters may be taken 
out once the complication is stepped up beyond ⑫. 
If a complication is ever stepped up beyond a ⑫, it has 
overwhelmed the PC and keeps them from acting further 
in the scene until the complication is removed or no 
longer hinders them. You can overcome this for a single 
test or contest by spending a ●
Ⓟ, but you may only keep 
one die for your total rather than two. This is a severe 
handicap, but sometimes it’s necessary.
OPPORTUNITIES
If the GM rolls a 1 on their dice, this hitch is also known 
as an opportunity (i.e., an opportunity for the player to 
do something), and any player can spend a ●
Ⓟ to step an 
existing complication down to a smaller size die. A ⑥ 
becomes a ④, and a ④ goes away. If the GM’s dice include 
multiple 1s, you may step down existing complications 
by more than one step. You still only pay a single ●
Ⓟ per 
complication affected.
Players can also spend a ●
Ⓟ to activate an opportunity 
to step up an asset—with a maximum of ⑫—for the rest 
of the scene. Multiple opportunities allow you to step up 
existing assets by more than one step. Even signature 
assets can be stepped up, but only for the scene.
COMPLICATIONS AS CONSEQUENCE
Complications may also represent those times when char­
acters are hurt or suffer a debilitating setback—physical, 
mental, or social. Instead of being taken out, you can 
choose to spend a ●
Ⓟ and take a complication. This works 
just as if you’d rolled a hitch on your dice, but you spend 
a ●
Ⓟ instead of gaining a ●
Ⓟ.
Amanda’s Engineer fails to stop an assault from a 
giant mechanical spider, and already has a Battered 
and Bruised ⑩ complication. Not wanting to be 
taken out, she spends a ●
Ⓟ to take a complication 
instead. Mary Rose’s effect die is a ⑧, so taking this 
steps up Amanda’s existing complication to ⑫.
Like the players, the GM may decide to accept complica­
tions on a GMC instead of allowing that GMC to be taken 
out. If the GMC loses a contest to a PC that would result 
in them being taken out (such as being shot or struck in 
the head) the GM may hand over a ●
Ⓟ to the player who 
won the contest and add a complication to the GMC equal 
to the effect die in the player’s roll. This should be used 
sparingly and only to drive the story forward, rather than 
to frustrate the players.
RECOVERING FROM COMPLICATIONS
Many complications are simply temporary problems and 
will go away before the next scene begins. Complications 
that represent major consequences, however, stick 
around. To get rid of them, the group must test their traits 
to recover.
Getting rid of or reducing a complication is a test vs a dice 
pool consisting of the complication and a base difficulty 
of ⑧ ⑧.
GM’S ROLL
ADAM’S COST
RESULT
⑧ complication steps
down to ⑥
⑧ complication steps
down to ④
⑧ complication
is eliminated
ROUND
AMANDA’S ROLL
RESULT
1
Wanted by State Police 
2
Wanted by State Police 
PREVIOUS CONDITION
Amanda’s Engineer incurred a Battered and Bruised ⑩ 
complication from a previous contest.
AMANDA’S ROLL 
SPIDER’S ROLL
The Engineer’s Battered and Bruised ⑩
complication steps up from the effect die to
become Battered and Bruised ⑫.


=== PAGE 42 ===
38 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
PLAYER’S ROLL 
TOTAL
DIFFICULTY
17
15
The Broken Arm ⑩ complication is eliminated.
If you beat the difficulty and your effect die is 
greater than the complication, the complication 
is eliminated.
Other traits may also affect the roll, as it’s easier to heal 
a gunshot wound in a Hospital and harder to shake off a 
concussion in a Noisy Room. In addition, the PC or their 
circumstances must be capable of improving the situation 
to make a roll.
When the test is complete, one of the following happens:
If you fail to beat the difficulty and roll a hitch, 
the complication is stepped up by one step for every 
hitch rolled, which turns a Broken Arm ⑩ into a 
Broken Arm ⑫.
PREVIOUS CONDITION
PC has an existing complication of Broken Arm ⑩.
PREVIOUS CONDITION
Existing complication of Broken Arm 
 
stepped down from previous successful rolls; 
adding the 
 gains a ●
Ⓟ for the player.
PLAYER’S ROLL 
TOTAL
DIFFICULTY
9
15
The Broken Arm ⑩ complication remains as is.
④ COMPLICATIONS
If a complication is stepped down to a ④, the very next 
time the complication might affect your character, you 
add it to your own dice pool and earn a ●
Ⓟ (much like a 
distinction being used with the Hinder SFX). Immediately 
after it’s used this way, it’s stepped down to zero and 
eliminated—unless the dice come up with one or more 
hitches, in which case the GM may choose to activate 
them and step up the complication to ⑥ or more.
SCENARIO 1
SCENARIO 2
PLAYER’S ROLL 
TOTAL
DIFFICULTY
11
15
The Broken Arm ⑩ complication is stepped up to ⑫.
PLAYER’S ROLL 
TOTAL
DIFFICULTY
13
15
Option A: The Broken Arm ⑩ complication is stepped up 
beyond ⑫ thus taking out the character out of the scene.
Option B: The Broken Arm ⑩ complication is stepped 
up to ⑫ and the GM can spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a new 
complication, Infected Arm ⑥.
PLAYER’S ROLL 
TOTAL
DIFFICULTY
16
15
The Broken Arm ⑩ complication is stepped down to ⑧.
PLAYER’S ROLL 
TOTAL
DIFFICULTY
18
15
The Broken Arm ⑩ complication is eliminated,
but due to the hitch, the GM spends a ●
Ⓟ to create
a new complication, Splinted Arm ⑥.
SCENARIO 5
SCENARIO 3
SCENARIO 4
This rule keeps the lowest rating of complications from 
creating more problems for the opposition. The increased 
chance of rolling a hitch on a ④ means there’s an added 
chance of a new complication being created or the current 
complication getting worse as a result of continued activ­
ity by the player.
If you beat the difficulty and the effect die is equal 
to or smaller than the complication, the complica­
tion is stepped down by one. You can’t try to recover 
that complication again until time passes.
If you fail to beat the difficulty, the complication 
remains as it is.
If you beat the difficulty but roll a hitch, the GM 
may hand over a ●
Ⓟ and introduce a new compli­
cation related to the one that was just recovered, 
turning a Broken Arm ⑩ into a Splinted Arm ⑥.
PC’S ROLL
RESULT
No Hitches
Broken Arm 
 complication eliminated
Broken Arm 
 stepped up to 
Broken Arm 
 stepped up twice to 


=== PAGE 43 ===
39
CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
ASSET AND 
COMPLICATION 
MODS
These mods change the way that assets and 
complications work in your Cortex Prime game.
STRESS
With this mod, instead of using complications to track 
injury, damage, or other negative personal effects on 
characters, you implement a distinct trait called stress. 
Complications can still be in play, but they represent 
external hindrances, obstacles, or other problems that 
aren’t direct injury or negative personal conditions like 
exhaustion or pain.
Stress replaces the rule about players choosing to spend 
●
Ⓟ to take a complication instead of being taken out. 
Stress doesn’t require players to spend ●
Ⓟ; any time a 
failure at a test or contest might take you out or cause 
harm, you take stress instead.
Any attack or effect that can take you out:
•	 Inflicts stress equal to the effect die in the attack 
(if the PC currently has no stress or a lower die 
rating of stress than the new stress die).
•	 Steps up stress (if the PC already has a stress die 
rating equal to or greater than the new stress die).
Amanda’s Engineer has ⑧ stress and takes ⑧ 
additional stress. This steps up the existing stress 
to ⑩. If she has ⑧ stress and instead takes ⑫ 
additional stress, this replaces the current ⑧ stress 
die with ⑫ stress.
Stress rated at ④ functions just like a complication rated 
at ④; it goes into a player’s dice pool instead of being 
added to the opposition dice pool and earns the player 
a ●
Ⓟ. Right after that test or contest, it either goes away 
or—if the player rolls a hitch on one of their dice—gets 
stepped up as the injury gets worse.
Only one type of stress can be used against a character 
at any given time, unless the GM pays the player a ●
Ⓟ to 
add an additional stress die to the opposition dice pool. 
Characters can be affected by both stress and complica­
tions at the same time, however.
COEY KUHN


=== PAGE 44 ===
40 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
TYPES OF STRESS
Typically, a character can be afflicted by one or more 
types of stress, depending on the game. Some games 
simply have a single stress track; others might distinguish 
between types, such as:
•	 Physical, Mental, Social
•	 Afraid, Angry, Exhausted, Injured, Insecure
Stress is a useful mod to use when you want your SFX or 
other game mechanics to cause or affect specific types of 
harm. It reduces the need to track quite so many compli­
cations at any given time; instead, you just track one or 
more stress dice. Stress also leads to other mechanical 
tricks, such as using stress to help the character at the 
risk of making things worse.
Characters can still choose to inflict complications on 
their opponents; these are created in the same manner as 
stress, but represent such things as deliberately hindering 
an opponent, creating distractions, and so on.
RECOVERING STRESS
All stress die ratings are always stepped down by one 
during any scene specifically framed to act as a rest 
period, downtime, or transition between action-heavy 
scenes. If a character takes stress in one scene from a 
battle, and the next scene is another battle soon after 
the first without any time spent resting up, then no stress 
is recovered. To recover any remaining stress, use the 
guidelines for recovering complications on page 37.
STRESSED OUT
If any stress die rating is ever stepped up past ⑫, the 
character is taken out (or stressed out) and no longer 
takes part in the scene. By default, you can’t spend a ●
Ⓟ 
to delay this effect, though certain SFX or other rules may 
be implemented to do that. When you’re stressed out, you 
are assumed to have ⑫ stress for the purposes of taking 
any additional stress, even though you can no longer act 
in the scene.
PUSHING STRESS
With this mod, players may choose to have their character 
shoulder through their pain and suffering and use it as 
a motivator rather than a setback. To do this, you spend 
a ●
Ⓟ and instead of adding the stress to the opposing 
dice pool, you add it to your own dice pool for that test 
or contest.
Using stress in this fashion has an additional cost. After 
the test or contest is resolved, the stress die included in 
your dice pool is stepped up by one. This may result in 
the PC being stressed out if the die is stepped up past ⑫.
In some games, this rule may be built into an SFX on a 
distinction or a power set. In this case, the SFX usually 
doesn’t require a ●
Ⓟ to activate; the drawback on the SFX 
is the worsening of the stress die.
PREVIOUS CONDITION
PC has an existing stress of Exhausted ⑩.
PC’S ACTION
PC’S DICE POOL
GM’S DICE POOL
Nothing
   
   
The PC’s stress of Exhausted ⑩ remains the same.
PC’S ACTION
PC’S DICE POOL
GM’S DICE POOL
Spends a ●
Ⓟ
   
 
The PC’s stress of Exhausted ⑩ steps up to ⑫ after the
contest is resolved (or by more if hitches are rolled).


=== PAGE 45 ===
If you beat the difficulty, the trauma die rating is 
stepped down by one. 
TRAUMA
Trauma is like long-term stress. Any time a PC’s stress is 
stepped up past ⑫, they’re stressed out of the scene, and 
they gain ⑥ trauma of the same type of stress that just 
increased. Trauma functions just like stress but is much 
harder to recover.
During any scene in which a character is stressed out and 
has taken trauma, additional stress to the character goes 
directly to trauma. Once trauma is stepped up beyond 
⑫, the character is permanently out of options—they’re 
dead, hopelessly incoherent, lost to their own psyche, or 
whatever seems most appropriate.
If you beat the difficulty but roll a hitch, the GM 
may hand over a ●
Ⓟ and introduce either a compli­
cation that will hinder the PC in the next scene or 
inflict stress of a different type than the trauma that 
was being recovered, starting at ⑥ (or stepping up 
by one if the PC already had stress of that type).
PREVIOUS CONDITION
PC has incurred the trauma of Exhausted (see below table 
for values) from a previous contest. They become stressed 
out again before recovering their trauma.
PREVIOUS CONDITION
PC has incurred a trauma of Exhausted ⑥.
SCENARIO 1
SCENARIO 2
SCENARIO 3
SCENARIO 4
PC’S ROLL 
PC’S TOTAL
DIFFICULTY
12
10
The Exhausted ⑥ trauma steps down to ④.
If the next scene is a recovery, transition, or otherwise 
restful scene in which the PC can be taken care of or 
allowed to recuperate, the PC’s stress automatically steps 
down by one, but the trauma remains at the level it was at 
the end of the previous scene. Recovering trauma requires 
a test using any appropriate traits vs a base difficulty of 
⑧ ⑧ plus the trauma die.
IF TRAUMA IS...
THEN...
Exhausted 
 trauma stepped up to 
Character is taken out of the
game permanently
PC’S ROLL 
PC’S TOTAL
DIFFICULTY
10
10
The Exhausted ⑥ trauma is unchanged.
PC’S ROLL 
PC’S TOTAL
DIFFICULTY
15
10
The Exhausted ⑥ trauma steps down to ④ and if the GM 
spends a ●
Ⓟ, the PC can incur a new stress starting at ⑥ or 
step up an existing stress rating different from Exhausted.
PC’S ROLL 
PC’S TOTAL
DIFFICULTY
0
10
The Exhausted ⑥ trauma steps up to ⑫.
STEPH C.
If you fail to beat the difficulty, the trauma does 
not get any better or worse. You can’t try to recover 
that trauma again until time passes. 
If you fail to beat the difficulty and roll one or 
more hitches, the trauma gets worse, stepping up 
by one for each hitch rolled. If this steps the trauma 
up past ⑫, that’s all, folks.


=== PAGE 46 ===
42 CHAPTER 1 PRIME CORE
SHAKEN AND STRICKEN
This mod applies stress dice directly to specific traits, 
such as attributes or skills. Determine which trait set 
before the game starts. Any time a character would take 
stress, the opponent chooses which trait gets it.
Adam’s playing a Hero in a Georgian era 
swashbuckling action game and his Hero gets shot 
with a blunderbuss. Mary Rose, who is using the 
Shaken and Stricken mod for this game, takes the ⑧ 
effect die of the blunderbuss attack and applies it as 
a ⑧ stress die to Adam’s Physical attribute.
If the stress applied to a trait is greater than the trait it’s 
assigned to, the PC is considered shaken. They can only 
keep one die for their total. If they’re already shaken and 
take stress to another trait that would make them shaken, 
they’re considered stricken and are taken out of the scene 
until they can recover.
ORIANA MENENDEZ
YANGTIAN LI
Stress applied to an attribute is added to the opposition’s 
dice pool whenever the player uses that attribute in a 
test or contest. The exception is when the stress is a ④, in 
which case the player includes the ④ in their own dice 
pool as per the basic ④ complications rule on page 38.
SHAKEN!
PC can only keep one die 
for any future contests.
STRICKEN!
Having another trait 
shaken takes the PC out 
of the scene.
A character also becomes stricken if any of their stress 
is stepped up beyond ⑫. Stress is recovered in the same 
way as other stress-based mods.
GM’S ATTACK
GM’S TOTAL
ADAM’S TOTAL
18
12
Physical
Mental
Social
STRESS EFFECT
Whenever Adam uses 
Physical ⑩ in a dice pool, 
the opposition gets to add
a ⑧ to their own pool
for the stress applied to 
that trait.
Physical
Mental
Social
⑧ STRESS
Physical
Mental
Social
⑫ STRESS
⑩ STRESS
Physical
Mental
Social
⑫ STRESS


=== PAGE 47 ===
LIFE POINTS
Instead of using complications or stress to reflect harm 
to characters, some Cortex Prime games might choose 
to use a system of life points instead. Life points are a 
classic option that eliminates the hindering aspect of 
taking damage and instead uses damage as a pacing 
mechanism for conflict.
All characters have a number of life points based on two of 
their traits. The die rating of those traits is added together 
to get the baseline life point score. Which traits are added 
together depends on the game and which traits are being 
used. Using the example trait sets, life points are equal to 
Physical + the highest of Fight, Focus, and Survive.
Amanda’s Engineer has Physical ⑧, Fight ④, 
Focus ⑥, and Survive ⑥. She has 14 life points
(8 from Physical ⑧, and 6 from either Focus ⑥
or Survive ⑥).
If you’re using different prime sets, base life points on two 
traits that emphasize hardiness, willpower, or stamina.
Life points can be handled in one of two ways. The first 
is an ablative method; the second is a threshold method. 
In either method, rather than adding the effect die as a 
complication (or stepping up an existing complication), 
the GM or player takes the difference between what the 
player needed to roll to beat the difficulty and what the 
player actually rolled and applies that as damage. Some 
games may have the damaging character roll an addi­
tional die from a signature asset, or gear, or some kind of 
power, and add that to the damage.
ABLATIVE LIFE POINTS
With this method, the damage taken from attacks is 
subtracted from the player’s life point score. If the PC’s 
life points drop to 0 or a negative amount, they are taken 
out of the scene and are clinging to life. Without some first 
aid or intervention, the player must spend a ●
Ⓟ to keep 
them alive, and any additional damage taken by the PC 
forces the same ●
Ⓟ spend until the total negative amount 
of damage is equal to the original life point score. If this 
happens, the PC is dead.
THRESHOLD LIFE POINTS
With this method, damage is split evenly into wounds 
and stun, before any additional damage from weapons 
or signature assets or powers is rolled; that additional 
damage is applied either to stun only, wounds only, or 
evenly split between both. Wounds and stun are marked 
off on two separate tracks that start at zero and go as high 
as the life point score.
If the accumulated wounds and stun, added together, 
exceed the life point score, the PC is unconscious. This 
includes having no wounds and stun that exceeds the life 
point score all by itself.
If the total wounds (not counting stun) exceed the life 
point score, the PC is dead.
GRACE P. FONG
PC’S LIFE 
POINTS
STUN
WOUNDS
PC’S STATUS
14
8
7
Unconscious
14
15
0
Unconscious
14
10
15
Dead
CLASSIC CONVERSION NOTE
Threshold life points is the method used in Classic Cortex games. 
When creating Cortex Prime games that approximate the classic 
approach, pay particular attention to mods that increase the total 
of dice rolls as these also increase wounds and stun.
RECOVERING LIFE POINTS
Characters who have taken damage and need to either 
recover lost life points (ablative method) or get rid of 
accumulated damage (threshold method) must make 
recovery tests. The difficulty is typically the standard 
difficulty dice of ⑥⑥ plus any relevant complications 
or other traits that might make it difficult. The amount 
that the player beats the difficulty by is the number of 
life points recovered (ablative) or is divided equally into 
recovered wounds and recovered stun. PCs using the 
threshold method can recover all stun damage at the end 
of any scene, assuming they have an opportunity to rest, 
heal, or seek treatment; proper medical treatment during 
downtime can eliminate wounds with tests beyond the 
PC’s own recovery tests.


=== PAGE 48 ===
JASON ENGLE
