
=== PAGE 49 ===
45
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
CHAPTER BREAKDOWN
This chapter explains how characters work, what a character 
file includes, and how to create characters for your game. 
Here’s how it breaks down.
Defining Characters: Choosing which traits to use and
which of those will be your prime sets.
Creating Characters: Creating a character from concept
to character file.
Growing Characters: Representing character growth, 
advancement, and experience.
Characters are the beating heart of Cortex Prime, waiting to be brought to life by the players and to inhabit 
your shared world. Like with everything else in this toolkit, the traits that define a character in your game 
are part of a veritable buffet of options. Your choice of prime sets, like attributes or skills, and how and 
where they interact with modular elements like SFX, assets, and die ratings is one of the most important 
decisions you need to make before you even get a game off the ground.
Once you’ve settled on how characters in your game are defined, your next decision is how each player 
creates their own character for the game. Which method (or methods) you use can inform the way the 
game plays out over time and what the first session of play looks like. Are characters made together at 
the table? Are they based mostly on pre-built archetypes?
Finally, you should also determine how characters grow and change over multiple sessions, if at all. Some 
groups want to see a noticeable change in game traits, others just want to record what happened in the 
session to use later on for flashbacks. There are several methods included in this chapter and you can 
pick and choose parts of them as you and your group like. 
CHAPTER 2
PRIME
CHARACTERS


=== PAGE 50 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
46
DEFINING 
CHARACTERS
It’s important that PCs are defined in a way that helps 
players get into their fictional roles and also have a good 
time at the table. If you’re keen on playing sessions that 
feel like blockbuster action movies or thrilling adventure 
stories, you want your characters defined by traits that 
are action-adventure oriented. On the other hand, if you 
want to play a more dramatic kind of game, then you want 
your characters loaded up with traits representing rela­
tionships with other characters and the values that drive 
them toward challenging social situations.
There’s no right or wrong way to define characters in 
Cortex Prime. You should figure out what trait sets make 
the most sense for the genre you want to play in, the style 
of play you like, and the sorts of things you want to use to 
tell characters apart from one another.
RAFAEL SARMENTO


=== PAGE 51 ===
 TRACE 2.0
AFFILIATIONS
DISTINCTIONS
TALENTS
STRESS
ROLES
RESOURCES
For best results, use pencil.
NAME:
HISTORY:
DESCRIPTION:
CHARACTER FILE
Solo
Partner
Squad
Forensics
Investigation
Legal
Medicine
Psychology
Tactics
Technology
Distinction #1:
Talent #1:
Talent #4
Distinction #2:
Talent #2:
Talent #5:
Distinction #3:
Talent #3:
Talent #6:
Afraid
Angry
Anxious
Exhausted
Injured
GROWTH POOL
Base ⑥⑥
Hinder: Gain a 
 when you switch out your distinction’s rating
of ⑧ for a ④.
HAMMERHEADS
DISTINCTIONS
RELATIONSHIPS
TRAINING PACKAGES
ATTRIBUTES
NAME:
CALL-SIGN:
DESCRIPTION:
CHARACTER FILE
For best results, use pencil.
High-Altitude Recovery
Legal Specialist
Hammerhead Pilot
HAZMAT
Crowd Control
Emergency Medical
Firefighting
Logistics
Network Specialist
Mechanic
Tactical Response
Technical Analyst
Urban Recovery
Marine Recovery
Physical
STRESS
Mental
STRESS
Social
STRESS
Your Life Before:
Your Approach/Attitude:
Your Quirk/Quality:
Hinder: Gain a 
 when you switch out your distinction’s 
rating of ⑧ for a ④.
Hinder: Gain a 
 when you switch out your distinction’s 
rating of ⑧ for a ④.
Hinder: Gain a 
 when you switch out your distinction’s 
rating of ⑧ for a ④.
Spend a 
 to step up an attribute when you connect to your 
old life.
Spend a 
 to reroll your dice when you align with your
true nature.
Spend a 
 to double your relationship die when your 
assistance embraces your quirk or quality.
Add ⑥ to the crisis pool to double your attribute die when 
you connect to your old life.
Add ⑥ to the crisis pool to step up your training package 
die when you align with your true nature.
Add ⑥ to the crisis pool to step up a relationship die you 
include in your pool when you embrace your quirk or quality.
SFX
SFX
SFX
saved my life
is good for a laugh
is dependable
knows their stuff
is a troublemaker
owes me big
is a liability
XP
EIDOLON ALPHA
ROLES
DISTINCTIONS
XP
ATTRIBUTES
For best results, use pencil.
NAME:
HISTORY:
DESCRIPTION:
CHARACTER FILE
Warrior
Priest
Scout
Other
Courage
STRESS
Grace
STRESS
Guile
STRESS
Reason
STRESS
Vigor
STRESS
Power 3
Power 1
Power 2
ENDARCH DISTINCTION
ROLE DISTINCTION
Hinder: Gain a 
 when you switch out this distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.
FREEFORM DISTINCTION
Hinder: Gain a 
 when you switch out this distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.
Hinder: Gain a 
 when you switch out your endarch 
distinction’s rating of ⑧ for a ④.
Summon: Shut down this endarch distinction to summon your 
Eidolon on your next turn.
Highlight
Highlight
Highlight
Highlight
Highlight
ENDARCH SFX
SUMMONED EIDOLON
BASE TRAIT
HIGHLIGHT
ATTRIBUTES
POWERS
SCALE
or
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 47
CHARACTER FILES
A character file is the central record of essential game 
details for your character. All players maintain their own 
character file and the GM maintains (often abbreviated) 
files for important GMCs. Character files serve double 
duty. On the one hand, it’s where you account for all of the 
die ratings, points, and important information about your 
character. On the other hand, it’s kind of a wish list to the 
GM. The choices players make when creating characters, 
which ratings and dice they assign to their characters, 
tell the GM what sort of character they want to play, and 
in turn what sort of stories they’re hoping to be part of.
A character file needs to include space for all of the infor­
mation players need to record and maintain. There’s no 
fixed character file for Cortex Prime because there’s no 
fixed array of trait sets—every Cortex game is potentially 
different in that way. Each of the settings in Prime Settings 
includes a blank character file by way of example, and 
every Cortex Prime setting published outside of this book 
also includes a blank character file.
PRIME SETS
A prime set is one of at least two trait sets, in addition to 
distinctions, that serve as the core of any Cortex Prime 
character. There are no pre-defined prime sets, because 
the trait sets you use in your game are up to you and the 
decisions you make with your group. The examples in 
this book use attributes and skills as prime sets, but you 
might have attributes and roles, affiliations and values, 
relationships and skills, and so forth.
Prime sets provide the baseline dice for your dice pool on 
any test or contest; they’re the dice you reach for when you 
want to do something. Each trait in these sets should have 
a die rating. If no die rating is noted, it typically defaults 
to a ④.
READYMADE PRIME SETS
Here are some prime set choices based on popular genres 
or tropes. Note that distinctions are always a prime set for 
Cortex Prime games, even if they’re not fully loaded with 
SFX or other features.
EXPANDING PRIME SETS
Prime sets can be expanded by adding SFX or trait state­
ments to them. This is especially common with powers, 
but it also makes attributes, roles, and relationships more 
interesting. Do this if you want a specific prime set to 
carry more story weight in the game through description 
or deeper definition.
Mary Rose decides that for her upcoming game 
of super-science treasure hunters, she’ll use the 
standard attribute triad of Physical, Mental,
and Social. However, she’s asking her players
to choose a statement for each of the three traits 
that further clarifies what the die rating in each 
attribute means. Physical ⑩ is one thing, but 
Physical Raw, Unchecked Strength ⑩ is another.
Keep in mind that if you add SFX or statements to a 
prime set, you shouldn’t include them with more than 
one other trait set in the game. For example, having your 
relationships and values use trait statements is fine, but 
don’t also include trait statements for powers and skills. 
Similarly, if your powers and distinctions each have SFX, 
your relationships and values shouldn’t. Two sets with 
trait statements and two sets with SFX? Fine.
GENRE
DISTINCTIONS PLUS…
Grim Fantasy
Attributes + Skills
Heist Action
Attributes + Roles
Paranormal Mystery
Roles + Powers 
Prime Time Drama
Values + Relationships
Romantic Fantasy
Relationships + Skills
Superheroes
Affiliations + Powers


=== PAGE 52 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
48
AFFILIATIONS
Affiliations reflect how well the PC performs in specific 
contextual situations, like environments, societal struc­
tures, or circumstances.
WHEN TO USE AFFILIATIONS
Affiliations are useful for games where teamwork or solo 
activity is a key factor in how successful a PC’s tests or 
contests are. They’re a good alternate for attributes if 
you’re less concerned with a character’s internal capabil­
ities and more interested in how they fit in with the world 
around them. If your game is based on squad missions, 
you might pair affiliations with roles. If you’re more inter­
ested in comic book superheroes, pair affiliations with 
power sets.
An affiliation set for a mission-based or superhero-based 
game looks like this:
•	 Solo: The character’s ability to act when alone.
•	 Buddy: The character’s ability to act when 
partnered with another character.
•	 Team: The character’s ability to act when part
of a group of three or more characters.
An affiliation set for a medieval setting based on 
the three estates might look like this:
•	 Clergy: The character’s ability to
act in the context of religion and 
religious institutions.
•	 Nobility: The character’s ability to
act in the presence of aristocracy
and ruling powers.
•	 Commons: The character’s ability to act 
among peasants and the bourgeoisie.
RATING AFFILIATIONS
Because most affiliation sets only have three traits and 
it’s assumed everyone is rated in each of them, the default 
die rating is a ⑧. If one of them is a ⑩, another of them 
has to be a ⑥.
⑥: Disadvantaged. Your character tends to get
in more trouble or functions at the lower end of
their ability.
⑧: Stable. Your character is comfortable in these 
situations and performs neither at their best nor 
their worst.
⑩: Advantaged. Your character performs at their 
best in these situations.


=== PAGE 53 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 49
ATTRIBUTES
Attributes represent raw ability, prowess, and effort.
They rarely offer an insight into a character’s experience, 
training, or external circumstances; they make 
a good baseline for a prime set. If you’re not sure 
where to start with prime sets in a Cortex Prime 
game, start with attributes.
WHEN TO USE ATTRIBUTES
Any conceivable test or contest can fall into one of 
three areas: Mental, Physical, and Social. You can 
use these three as your attributes, or you can expand 
beyond this and shape the tone and flavor of your 
Cortex Prime game with a different list.
A classic attribute set is as follows:
•	 Agility: Speed, reaction time, and
hand-eye coordination.
•	 Alertness: Mental acuity, perception,
and awareness of your surroundings.
•	 Intelligence: Reason, logic, and ability
to use what you’ve learned.
•	 Strength: Physical power, muscle,
and athleticism.
•	 Vitality: Physical endurance, stamina, and 
ability to survive in hostile surroundings.
•	 Willpower: Mental resolve, concentration, 
focus, and force of will.
A swashbuckling attribute set might be:
•	 Courage: Determination and steel
in the face of danger.
•	 Faith: Belief and conviction in
higher powers or in others.
•	 Guile: Capacity for wit, cunning,
and subterfuge.
•	 Reason: Raw logic, knowledge, and mental 
comprehension.
•	 Vigor: Physical fitness, strength, and endurance.
RATING ATTRIBUTES
Attributes usually have a rating from ⑥ to ⑩, although 
there are exceptions. Everyone has a rating in each of 
them, and they usually default to a ⑧. Higher rated attri­
butes must be balanced out with lower rated ones.
These ratings may scale differently depending on your 
game, but in general they follow this basic scheme:
④: Poor. Notably deficient in this area.
⑥: Typical. An average degree of ability.
⑧: Excellent. Above-average performance.
⑩: Remarkable. Greatly above average.
⑫: Incredible. Peak levels of ability.
LISA HEIDHOFF


=== PAGE 54 ===
GIBY JOSEPH
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
50
DISTINCTIONS
To inspire roleplaying, PCs have three distinctions that 
paint a clearer picture of their background, personality, 
and role in the story. Just by looking at your character’s 
three distinctions you should have a clear impression of 
who they are and how their past has shaped them.
WHEN TO USE DISTINCTIONS
For a given Cortex Prime game, distinctions might be 
player-created (come up with three backgrounds, person­
ality quirks, catch phrases, or job descriptions) or the GM 
might prepare a big list of them to choose from.
Distinctions are one of the main ways to earn ●
Ⓟ. Every 
Cortex Prime game should include distinctions as one 
of the prime sets, which means your distinctions should 
be varied and broad enough that one of them will apply 
almost every time you put together a dice pool.
Distinctions are frequently paired up with SFX—in fact, 
all of them have the Hinder SFX: “Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you 
switch out this distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.” You can assign 
more SFX to a distinction but leave them locked until 
the player earns experience or growth (see “Growing 
Characters” on page 82) or some other mechanic (see 
“Rating Distinctions,” below).
The most basic distinction looks something like this:
The text in italics should be no more than one 
or two sentences and give context for what this 
distinction means or implies. The choice of when 
to use a distinction is the player’s, but it must 
make narrative sense to do so.
RATING DISTINCTIONS
Distinctions are always rated as ⑧ and as such 
don’t necessarily need to have the die rating 
included in text when referring to them. That 
said, you might decide to apply a mod to this rule 
and have distinctions rated from ④ to ⑫ like 
other traits; if so, the average of the dice should 
still be ⑧.
While three distinctions is the default number for Cortex 
Prime games, you’re under no obligation to limit your 
characters to that many. Some Cortex Prime games allow 
for the option of several distinctions, rated anywhere 
from ④ to ⑫. In games like this, consider connecting 
the unlocking of SFX to the die rating, rather than XP 
spending: unlock one SFX at ④, another at ⑧, and the 
last one at ⑫.
HIGHLIGHTING OTHER TRAITS
Distinctions can speed up character creation if they’re 
pre-built to represent common character qualities, back­
grounds, or vocations. Having the choice of distinction 
also generate other traits on the character file is a great 
option. With this mod, you can have each distinction 
include two highlight traits, which are traits from a 
specific trait set (like skills or powers) that the distinc­
tion is most usefully linked to. If you use highlight traits, 
choosing the distinction means those traits get stepped 
up by one during character creation.
Adam’s creating a Hero in Mary Rose’s treasure-
hunting super-science game, which uses highlight 
traits—skills, in this case. He chooses a distinction 
called Soldier of Fortune, which has the highlight 
skills of Shoot and Survive. This indicates that being 
a soldier of fortune implies a tendency toward being 
able to use firearms or bows, as well as live off the 
land and track prey. When assigning dice to his skills, 
Adam first steps up Shoot and Survive for free 
before he applies any other steps.
APOCALYPTIC CULT 
SURVIVOR
What you experienced in the cult 
had a profound effect on your 
life and what you do now,
a decade later.
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when 
you switch out this 
distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.


=== PAGE 55 ===
VENUS BAMBISA
POWERS
A power is a special kind of trait that represents super­
human ability or some extraordinary quality that most 
normal humans or baseline characters don’t have. The 
origin or source of powers varies from setting to setting—
radiation, genetic mutation, sorcery, high-tech gadgets, 
etc. Powers can also be used to represent gear or special 
equipment, making it possible to mix heroes of varying 
power origins together with the same system.
WHEN TO USE POWERS
Powers are central to superhero games but are also appro­
priate for fantasy games or science fiction games with 
aliens. They are incredibly flexible and—paired with SFX 
and limits—they can represent almost any super-powered 
character. On page 182 of Prime Lists there’s a big list of 
powers that you can start with; renaming and tweaking 
this list is one of the key parts of defining a game that uses 
powers. For quick reference, here’s that power list without 
the full description of what they do:
•	 Attack: blasts, weapons
•	 Durability: toughness, force fields
•	 Elemental Control: air, earth, fire, gravity,
ice, kinetic, light, weather, water, etc.
•	 Intangibility: phasing through objects,
going ethereal
•	 Intelligence: inventiveness, knowledge,
calculation speed
•	 Invisibility: vs sight or vs other senses
•	 Mimic: creating copies of other powers as assets
•	 Movement: speed, flight, swing, swim, etc.
•	 Psychic: mind control, telepathy, etc.
•	 Reflexes: reaction time, coordination
•	 Resistance: vs sonic, poison, psychic, fire, etc.
•	 Senses: vision, hearing, touch, weird senses
•	 Shapeshift: changing shape, copying
other’s appearance
•	 Size-Changing: grow, shrink
•	 Sorcery: creating magical assets
•	 Stamina: endurance, staying power
•	 Strength: might and heavy lifting
•	 Stretch: elongated limbs
•	 Teleport: gateways, wormholes,
shadow-steps, etc.
•	 Transmutation: changing
one thing into another


=== PAGE 56 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
52
RATING POWERS
Powers are rated on a short scale from minor to godlike. If 
all of the super-strong heroes in your comic book universe 
tend to have Superhuman Strength ⑩ or Godlike Strength 
⑫, you won’t see any fine-grained differences in their 
ratings. That’s intentional! Power ratings are rungs of 
broad ability and scope, as well as significance. The fine 
grains are seen in choice of SFX and in all of the other 
traits the superhero possesses, from their distinctions to 
their skills, relationships, or values.
A power has a die rating range between ⑥ and ⑫; the 
rating usually defines how far-reaching, extensive, or 
significant the power is. If you don’t have a power, you 
don’t have a default die rating in it.
⑥: Minor (or Influence). A power with this rating 
allows the character to do something most people 
can’t do, but it doesn’t have much effect on ordinary 
tests and contests nor is it likely to be a character’s 
signature power. Powers that permit levitation, 
additional senses, or low-level enhancements are 
often rated ⑥.
⑧: Enhanced (or Control). A power with this 
rating represents a level of performance beyond 
ordinary human beings, and one that the character 
likely uses most of the time. Flight at subsonic 
speeds, strength or stamina at the absolute peak of 
human capability, control over an element or energy 
type in a local area, or attacks that are the equivalent 
of automatic weapons are rated ⑧.
⑩: Superhuman (or Mastery). A power with this 
rating is rare and reflects someone with extensive 
training or use in their power, an individual who 
stands out among others with this power, or 
performance at a truly superhuman level.
⑫: Godlike (or Supremacy). Very few have a 
power at this rating, as it represents a level of control 
beyond superhuman or at the very peak of potential 
with a specific ability. It’s reserved for truly godlike 
characters and aliens, or superhuman individuals 
whose signature power puts them among the top tier 
of those who have it.
Powers simply do what they say they do and can be used 
as benchmarks for performance on an automatic success 
(the GM can simply say that, because you have a power 
at ⑧ or ⑩, you can just do that thing if the outcome isn’t 
really in question). Powers aren’t usually a prime set; 
instead they’re added to a dice pool when their use can 
be justified as key to the test or contest’s success or failure.
POWER SETS
A power set is a mod that adds thematic strength to a 
collection of power traits. Power sets usually come with 
a limit that governs them, one or more helpful SFX, and a 
single origin or source that explains why your character 
has these powers. A power set might be something like 
Russian Science Experiment or Alpha Centauri Heritage 
or Dwarfish Traits. Each power set counts as a trait set 
of its own.
Using power sets helps in a number of ways: It allows you 
to pre-build standardized “power sources” for your super­
hero characters, ready for players to choose at character 
creation. It links powers thematically with a limit that can 
provide ●
Ⓟ or other benefits. And it makes it possible to 
group SFX together in flavorful ways that accentuate the 
powers you’re using, rather than seeming disconnected.
A power set must have at least one SFX, which helps flavor 
the use of the powers. SFX are usually a way to double 
specific power dice, step up dice, or roll an additional 
⑥ when using the power trait. Power set SFX are always 
linked to the power set’s theme. In some cases, using a 
specific power trait in a specific way is sufficient activa­
tion for the SFX (such as, “step up Superhuman Strength ⑩ 
when you are submerged in water”) while others require 
●
Ⓟ spends.
A power set must have at least one limit, specifying what 
happens to the power set under certain conditions. Limits 
always exist in the form of a ●
Ⓟ gain in return for shutting 
down the power set or, in some cases, specific power traits 
included with the power set. A shut down power set no 
longer works and its power traits can’t be included in dice 
pools until a specific recovery condition is met.
The intent behind limits is that players have the freedom 
to choose when and where their powers stop working, 
act uncontrollably, or trigger negative effects. It’s up to 
you to decide if the GM has the power to actually trigger 
limits, too—if that’s the case, the GM should always ask 
the player if they want to activate the limit on their own in 
order to get the benefit of activating it on their own terms.
There’s no set number of powers in a power set (though 
it’s usually at least two) and no cap on the die ratings of 
the power traits (though most don’t have more than one 
trait at ⑩ or ⑫). Individual power traits within a power 
set might be stepped up as a result of growth, or entire 
power sets might be acquired or swapped out during play, 
depending on the game.
Characters may have more than one power set. Each of 
them counts as a different trait set; if you have two power 
sets, you may include one power from each of the sets in 
your dice pool at no cost.


=== PAGE 57 ===
JULIA METZGER
53
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS


=== PAGE 58 ===
VANESSA MORALES
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
54
ABILITIES
Some games use a mod of power sets called abilities. An 
ability is a rated trait, something that may be included 
in a dice pool, that also has a number of SFX attached 
to it. It works a lot like a power with its own SFX, rather 
than a group of powers with linked SFX. In games that 
use abilities, the intention is to simplify a power set while 
keeping it separate from distinctions—as abilities don’t 
automatically come with the “Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch 
out this distinction’s ⑧ for a ④” Hinder SFX—and to 
make super powers or alien qualities a more dramatic, 
narrative-shaping element rather than a simple dice pool 
builder. Almost all ability SFX expand what ●
Ⓟ can do in 
the game. There is a list of abilities and SFX in Prime Lists 
starting on page 194.
When creating a character with an ability, choose one of 
the SFX listed underneath the ability for free. Unlock the 
other SFX just as you’d unlock SFX on distinctions.
Abilities often include effect tags and descriptor tags. The 
ability’s effect tag suggests ways that you might roll the 
ability in a test or contest. There are six effect tags:
Attack effects are pretty cut and dry. Dice from
this effect hurt people; you use them in rolls to
give others stress.
Sensory effects allow the character to better
perceive and understand their surroundings; you
roll them in perception-based tests and contests.
Movement effects help characters get from place 
to place in unusual ways, so roll the dice in tests or 
contests that depend on speed or travel.
Control effects allow characters to manipulate 
aspects of their surroundings. Use the ability die to 
influence the outcome of a test or contest by altering 
the environment.
Defense effects protect the character from some 
type of harm. Roll the die when it would help you 
against attacks or rolls to inflict stress.
Enhancement effects let the character change, shift, 
boost, or alter their body or talents in some amazing 
way. Roll this ability when your enhancements give you 
an advantage.
An ability’s descriptor tag establishes the details of how 
and why an ability works or specifies something about 
how the ability contributes to the story. They may end 
up being used in place of the ability’s generic name in a 
character file.
Adam and Tina each create wizards that have Blast 
as an ability; but while Adam’s Hero wizard has Blast 
with descriptor tag Lightning Bolt, Tina’s Sage wizard 
has Blast with descriptor tag Flame Strike. Both 
abilities cause some serious hurt, of course, but 
someone susceptible to electricity would be much 
more affected by Adam’s Lightning Bolt than Tina’s 
Flame Strike. On the other hand, someone that
might be easily dehydrated or burned would hurt 
more from Tina’s Flame Strike due to the
heat-based descriptor. 
An example ability might be something like this:
Super Strength ⑩
You have amazing strength beyond the abilities of most mortals 
and can accomplish great feats of raw power and muscle.
Effect: Enhancement
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to perform a fantastic feat of strength.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to throw or knock another character 
out of a scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to pound on the ground, creating a 
shockwave sweep effect, knocking everyone in the 
scene off their feet.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to break through a wall—even a brick 
or stone wall—to grab a target or object on the 
other side.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to wield a
large inanimate object, like
an automobile, as a weapon
(and as a ⑧ asset.)


=== PAGE 59 ===
J YANG
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 55
RELATIONSHIPS
Relationships are traits that represent the intensity 
and importance of a character’s connection to another 
character or group of characters. This connection may 
be positive or negative in nature, so long as it motivates 
and empowers the character who has it. PCs start with 
relationships with other PCs and some GMCs but can add 
more during play. This makes relationships flexible and 
not as limited as some other trait sets.
WHEN TO USE RELATIONSHIPS
A relationship contributes its die rating to a dice pool when 
the test or contest involves the character the relationship 
is linked to, or when that character has influence over or 
inspires the PC. This makes them great to use in Cortex 
Prime games that center around emotional drama, large 
ensemble casts of characters, the dynamics of a prime 
time drama, or interconnected groups. Use relationships 
if the connections between characters are as significant 
to the outcome of a story as any other character trait.
RATING RELATIONSHIPS
A relationship’s die rating indicates the intensity of the 
character’s feelings or attachment to the subject of the 
relationship. A high die rating doesn’t mean you neces­
sarily like the subject more than a low one; in fact, your 
⑩ relationship might be a really intense hatred, or a 
particularly strong jealousy.
④: I don’t feel anything for this person.
⑥: This person matters, but so do a lot of people.
⑧: I’m invested in this person.
⑩: This person matters more than most.
⑫: There’s nobody who matters more than they do.
Relationships between PCs are assigned during char­
acter creation. If characters are created using a simple 
trait assignment process (such as picking distinctions, 
assigning dice to attributes and skills, etc.), then one 
relationship is assigned a ⑩, another a ⑧ and the rest 
⑥. Characters created using another system such as 
pathways begin as a ⑥ until stepped up as a result of 
pathways choices.
During play, ⑥ relationships can be created using a ●
Ⓟ, 
much like a temporary asset. The relationship lasts for 
the duration of the session; when experience or growth is 
resolved, it can either be dropped or made permanent. If 
made permanent, the relationship remains as a ⑥ until 
stepped up in later sessions.
If a PC has no relationship to a character for any given test 
or contest, they can either create one with a ●
Ⓟ or assume 
a ④ relationship default, just like any skill.
REPUTATIONS
A reputation is a relationship trait mod that may be used 
alongside relationships or in place of them. Reputations 
work like relationships do, except they represent a char­
acter’s standing with a group, organization, company, 
or culture. PCs might start with a cap on their reputa­
tion die ratings because of inexperience or lack of fame 
or popularity, and steadily increase their reputations as 
play continues.
Reputations change as often as relationships do. They can 
also be affected by the actions of the character during play, 
especially when paired with trait statements (see page 65 
for more on trait statements). A player might challenge 
their reputation statement to get a short-term benefit, only 
to see their standing drop in the long term. Increasing 
reputation might be a good use of milestone-based XP, 
as players take concrete actions in support of a group or 
organization in order to raise their status.


=== PAGE 60 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
56
RESOURCES
There are four types of resource: extras, locations, orga­
nizations, and props. Resources are usually represented 
by two or more dice of the same size, which may be used 
to aid a test or contest where that resource is helpful or 
significant. Players choose how many resource dice to 
roll—after they’re rolled, those dice are considered spent 
and can be recovered later during downtime. Thus, if a 
character has ⑥⑥⑥ in a resource and uses ⑥⑥ to aid 
in a test, those two dice are spent, and one remains.
WHEN TO USE RESOURCES
Include resources when you want an asset that is exhaust­
ible and renewable. You might use all four kinds of 
resource or just one or two types.
•	 Extra: An extra is a type of GMC, but when it’s 
attached to a PC it represents a contact or ally
the player may draw on for help.
•	 Location: A location is a place in the game
setting that may be used to set scenes or
provide valuable resources.
•	 Organization (or org): An organization is a 
group of people who function under a specific 
ideology, structure, or goal. An org resource may 
open channels that the PC doesn’t have alone.
•	 Prop: A prop is a tool, object, or item that helps a 
PC broaden the scope of what they can achieve in 
specific situations.
A resource die is committed before the test or contest 
dice pool is rolled but rolled separately. If more than 
one resource die is spent to aid a test or contest, only 
the highest rolling die is applied. This result is added to
the total. 
Resources are recovered at the beginning of every session, 
or during any period of downtime (such as a week of 
relaxation). You might also decide that resources can be 
refreshed by spending ●
Ⓟ on a one for one basis (one ●
Ⓟ 
for one resource die recovered).
RATING RESOURCES
Every resource has a name, a die rating (nearly always 
in multiples of ⑥, but sometimes larger dice), and 
(optionally) a tag or label to indicate what kind of field or 
quality that resource belongs to, such as Politics, Crime, 
Academics, or Military. If you use tags, each listed resource 
should have two of them, and they should inform you of 
the kind of test or contest that the resource might apply 
to. A GM can invoke GMC resources by spending ●
Ⓟ to 
add to an opposition dice pool total.
Adam’s playing his Hero in a TRACE 2.0 game 
run by Mary Rose. His Hero has an org resource 
called Cortez City Police Department, with the 
tags Investigation and Law. When Adam’s Hero is 
investigating a criminal case or researching a legal 
matter, he could roll one or more resource dice 
from this org alongside his dice pool for the test or 
contest. On the other hand, if he’s trying to break 
into a bank and there are cops out looking for the 
Hero, Mary Rose might spend a ●
Ⓟ to activate a 
police chief GMC’s Cortez City Police Department 
resource for the opposition’s dice pool total.
RESOURCES VS SIGNATURE ASSETS
VS HERO DICE
A resource is similar in many ways to a signature asset in 
that it’s a trait that represents an external person, object, 
place, or thing that contributes to a character’s dice pool 
total in a test or contest. It’s also similar to a hero die in 
that it’s rolled separately and added to the total.
Resource dice are more helpful than signature assets 
because they always increase the potential total in a 
test or contest, but the downside is that they’re spent, 
whereas a signature asset can be used as many times as 
is justifiable.
Resource dice are more helpful than hero dice because 
they don’t require ●
Ⓟ to activate them, but the downside 
is that they can only be used in specific circumstances, 
represented by the resource’s tag. Hero dice can be used 
on any test or contest, regardless of the nature of that test 
or contest.


=== PAGE 61 ===
JOEL DUQUE
SKILLS
Skills represent natural talent, training, or experience. 
If you can describe it as a verb, it’s a good candidate for 
a skill. The default skill list for Cortex Prime consists
of verbs.
WHEN TO USE SKILLS
Because it’s so easy to describe characters in roleplay­
ing games by what they can do and how they’re trained, 
skills are a natural trait set to include in a Cortex Prime 
game. If you aren’t using skills, you’re probably either 
focused more on dramatic flavor or you’ve got a similar 
kind of trait such as roles or specialties, which work a lot 
like skills.
Although you can and should create a skill list for your 
game based on the genre and sorts of activities you expect 
to be common in the game’s world, the default list is 
provided as a baseline.
Note how they’re all framed as verbs, to make it easier to 
imagine when you’d use them.
•	 Craft: Crafting things, includes building, 
assembling, or creating stuff.
•	 Drive: Land and surface vehicles, including
cars, boats, and trucks.
•	 Fight: All kinds of close combat, including 
weapons or fists.
•	 Fix: Repairing things.
•	 Fly: Piloting air vehicles or spacecraft.
•	 Focus: Concentrating on something, to study
or steel your will or whatever.
•	 Influence: Making others do, think, act, or feel 
the way you want them to.
•	 Know: General knowledge and recall. Use 
specialties to cover specific areas: Business, 
Navigation, Religion, Animals, Fine Arts, etc.
Know always includes a free specialty of the 
player’s choice.
•	 Labor: Carrying out tasks of manual labor, lifting, 
pushing, digging, pulling, hauling.
•	 Move: Running, jumping, climbing trees.
•	 Notice: Spotting, sensing, or hearing things.
•	 Operate: Using things like computers, gadgets, 
and devices.
•	 Perform: Acting, putting on a show.
•	 Shoot: Guns, big rocket launchers, things that 
you point and shoot.
•	 Sneak: Sneaking around. Sneakily.
•	 Survive: Surviving in the outdoors or wherever.
•	 Throw: Throwing things.
•	 Treat: Taking care of people. Heal, treatment of 
injury, but also counseling.
•	 Trick: Deceiving or conning somebody,
sleight of hand, using spin.


=== PAGE 62 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
58
RATING SKILLS
Every PC has at least a ④ in each skill, which represents 
being untrained. Proficiency and expertise are repre­
sented by ratings between ⑥ and ⑫. Most characters 
start with 12 points (roughly equal to 2/3 the number of 
skills in the skill list) to put into skills’ die ratings, with 
one point stepping up a die by one step; some or all of 
these points may be predetermined by character creation 
options such as archetypes or pathways.
④: Untrained. You have no idea what you’re doing, 
and you’re likely to create trouble when you try it,
but who knows.
⑥: Competent. Sufficient training to get by.
You’re comfortable doing this.
⑧: Expert. Able to do this for a living.
This is second nature to you.
⑩: Master. One of the best in the field.
Likely known to others who possess the skill.
⑫: Grandmaster. One of the best in the
world. Known even to those outside the field.
ROLES
Roles are skill-like trait mods that replace skills in some 
expressions of Cortex Prime. A role acts like a skill group 
or skill set, rather than a specific skill, and reflects a PC’s 
experience, training, or proficiency in a broad thematic 
area. Games that use roles should have no fewer than 
three and no more than six roles.
Roles are rated from ④ to ⑫, like other traits. Each PC 
usually has at least one ⑩, one ⑧, and one ④, with the 
rest at ⑥.
•	 Three roles: ⑩, ⑧, and ④.
•	 Four roles: ⑩, ⑧, ⑥, and ④.
•	 Five roles: ⑩, ⑧, ⑥, ⑥, and ④.
•	 Six roles: ⑩, ⑧, ⑥, ⑥, ⑥, and ④.
A set of roles for a tactical action game might be:
•	 Commander: Making strategic decisions; inspiring 
the troops; talking with authority.
•	 Engineer: Repairing and maintaining equipment; 
jury-rigging gear; understanding science.
•	 Medic: Applying first aid and medical treatment to 
others; recognizing and diagnosing disease; using 
medical equipment.
•	 Sniper: Using ranged weapons; patiently waiting
in a hidden location; being familiar with terrain.
•	 Soldier: Close-combat fighting; use of military 
weapons; making use of formation and defenses.
A set of roles for a fantasy action game might be:
•	 Warrior: Use of all weapons, armor, and combat 
training; small unit tactics; maintaining gear.
•	 Priest: Use of healing spells; channeling divine 
energy; knowledge of religion.
•	 Wizard: Use of elemental spells; using arcane 
items; knowledge of magic and occult.
•	 Rogue: Use of thief tools; sneaking, spying, and 
scouting; opening barriers; knowledge of crime.
•	 Bard: Use of social skills; performance-based 
magic; knowledge of culture and legends.
Roles are a good choice for a Cortex Prime game that 
requires specialization without removing the ability to 
use certain skills. This includes action-heavy or team-
oriented games of all genres. When using roles, specialties 
allow for narrow focus in a role’s area of proficiency.
For a variation on roles, check out training packages in 
Hammerheads on page 152.
H. WON


=== PAGE 63 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 59
THE SKILL PYRAMID
One way to ensure that players aren’t quickly maxing out 
their skills or other traits is to require them to adhere to 
a skill pyramid. Using this mod, if you want a ⑩ rating 
in a skill, you need at least two ⑧ rated skills and three 
⑥ rated skills. If you want a ⑫, you need at least two 
at ⑩, three at ⑧, and four at ⑥. In order to maintain 
the skill pyramid, it may be necessary to step up a ④ 
skill before subsequently stepping up other, larger dice 
until the pyramid is restored. As skills have a baseline 
of ④, there’s no required number of ④ rated skills in
the pyramid.
MULTI-LEVEL SPECIALTIES
With this mod, specialties start at ⑥ but can be increased 
to multiple dice or larger dice either during character 
creation or through experience. They’re usually grouped 
as follows:
Trained: ⑥
Expert: ⑧ or ⑥⑥
Master: ⑩ or ⑧ ⑧ or ⑥⑥⑥
Grandmaster: ⑫ or ⑩ ⑩
or ⑧ ⑧ ⑧ or ⑥⑥⑥⑥
NO SKILLS, JUST SPECIALTIES
A Cortex Prime game that doesn’t use skills as a trait set 
may choose to use specialties as a trait on their own. With 
this mod, specialties are rated from ⑧ to ⑫ rather than 
set at ⑥. Unlike skills, there’s no default specialty level for 
all characters—if you don’t have a specialty, it’s assumed 
the kinds of activity included in the specialty aren’t rele­
vant or significant to your character.
Without a Pickpocket specialty, Tina’s Sage can still 
clandestinely pilfer a key; she just doesn't gain an 
additional die for doing so beyond what she might 
have from other traits.
Without skills, it’s useful to create a master list of special­
ties to choose from so that the thematic aspects of the 
setting are maintained. For example, listing Computers, 
Spacecraft, and Laser Weapons tells players that those 
things are a part of the setting.
SKILL AND SPECIALTY SPLIT
With this mod, characters have general skills at a rating 
of ④ (Untrained) or ⑥ (Competent), but to have higher 
ratings they must specialize. Ratings of ⑧ (Expert),
⑩ (Master), and ⑫ (Grandmaster) are only available for 
specialties of that skill, and a character may have multiple 
specialties at different die ratings.
Mary Rose is running a game where the general skill 
of Drive only goes as high as ⑥ and requires her 
players to focus to a specialty such as Motorcycles
to have a ⑧ or higher. Adam’s Hero might end up 
with Drive ⑥ (Speed Boat ⑧, Motorcycles ⑩, 
Drift Cars ⑩).
Using this mod, you don’t add both the skill and the 
specialty to the dice pool. Your character’s specialty 
replaces the skill die rating, which you continue to use for 
all tests and contests where your specialties don’t apply.
This mod emulates the way skills work in Classic Cortex 
games and is a good option if you want to encourage many 
high-rated but narrow skills.
Top rating only obtainable once 
skills below line are achieved.
Skills reach this quantity and
at these die ratings in order
to move a second level skill to
the top rating.
If this mod is used with highlight traits associated with 
distinctions, or any other bonus skill steps, players must 
“fill in” the pyramid with skills to account for any imbal­
ances once the bonus steps from the highlight skills
are resolved.
SPECIALTIES
A specialty is a narrow area of concentration or focus 
within a skill. Using this mod, specialties confer a bonus 
⑥ to any test or contest that falls into that narrow area 
and involves the skill they’re attached to. There’s no 
fixed list of specialties, which may include things like: 
Grappling, Seduction, Rifles, Pickpocket.
If you’re using specialties without using skills, specialties 
replace skills but can’t be used by default. They start out 
at a ⑥ and can increase to as much as ⑫, but if you don’t 
have a specialty you don’t have a rating in it. See No Skills, 
Just Specialties for more information.
SPECIALTY: GUNS
Skill
Subject
Bonus ⑥?
Shoot 
PC shoots a hunting rifle
YES
Shoot 
PC shoots a bow & arrow
NO
Fix 
PC fixes a cannon
YES
Fix 
PC fixes a generator
NO
Know 
PC tries to infer the
caliber of a bullet
YES
Know 
PC wants to figure out
the artist of a painting
NO


=== PAGE 64 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
60
VALUES
Values represent how much specific things matter to the 
PCs and, in turn, how much they influence the outcome 
of tests and contests. They can embody such things as 
societal mores, cultural principles, or elements of a code 
of honor or behavior. As with relationships, a high rating 
in a value doesn’t mean your character likes or stands out 
as a paragon of that value, but rather that they are more 
invested and concerned about that value than if they had 
it at a lower die rating. A ⑩ in Truth could still mean the 
character is a liar, but the concept of truth and falsehood 
is one of the things that drives them the most to succeed.
WHEN TO USE VALUES
Values are useful in games where differences in physical 
or mental attributes matter less to a character than what 
they’re motivated by and what they believe. Prime time 
drama, YA stories, political drama, and other personal­
ity-driven and emotion-driven genres are all excellent 
candidates for the values trait set.
A dramatic set of values for a game about superheroes and 
their friends might be:
•	 Duty: Motivated by what one feels
they must do for others.
•	 Glory: Motivated by praise, acclaim,
and renown.
•	 Justice: Motivated by adherence to
the law and what’s right.
•	 Love: Motivated by affection and
compassion for others.
•	 Power: Motivated by control, wealth,
and influence.
•	 Truth: Motivated by facts, fidelity,
and rejection of deceit.
A dramatic set of values for a game about dark supernat­
ural romance might be:
•	 Envy: Driven by coveting the status, traits,
or possessions of others.
•	 Gluttony: Driven by appetite, excess,
and consumption.
•	 Greed: Driven by avarice and a desire to possess 
more than what one has.
•	 Lust: Driven by sexual or carnal desire.
•	 Pride: Driven by hubris and placing one’s own 
needs and successes before others.
•	 Sloth: Driven by apathy and laziness.
•	 Wrath: Driven by anger and vengeance.
RATING VALUES
Five to seven values is usually enough. Values have the 
same range of dice as attributes: usually one at ⑩, one 
or two at ⑧, one at ④, and the rest at ⑥. When a value 
changes—either stepping up or stepping down by a die 
size—one other value must change at the same time in 
the opposite direction. Thus, the total number of die steps 
in the dice assigned to values in any given Cortex Prime 
game should always stay the same. Values can never be 
lower than ④ or higher than ⑫.
Tina’s playing her Sage in one of Mary Rose’s high 
society drama games, where the values are the 
seven deadly sins. During play, Tina steps up her 
Gluttony ⑧ to ⑩ to show that her Sage has taken 
a turn toward the intemperate. Because she stepped 
one value up, she has to step another one down, so 
she steps down her Wrath ⑥ to ④. No time to 
worry about being angry, she thinks.
The die rating of a value measures how much the value 
matters to the character, as follows:
④: “I’m really not into this.”
⑥: “Sure, this matters. But so do a lot of things.”
⑧: “This is definitely on my radar.”
⑩: “I’m all over this thing.”
⑫: “This is my heart and soul.”
LENKA ŠIMEČKOVÁ


=== PAGE 65 ===
SFX AND OTHER TRICKS
SFX is short for “special effect.” It’s usually some kind of 
benefit or bonus that only occurs under certain condi­
tions. In Cortex Prime, SFX are used as a way to introduce 
exception-based rules for trait sets that possess them. 
They’re a way to break the rules of the game, modify the 
outcome of tests and contests, and add more texture to 
the story.
All distinctions get the “Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out 
this distinction’s ⑧ for a ④” Hinder SFX for free, and 
other trait sets may have one or more SFX to give context 
to the traits in the set.
WHEN TO USE SFX
SFX are especially useful when you want to add depth and 
variety to trait sets or assets. In general, you should decide 
which trait set in your game features SFX, and use that 
trait set as the key area of differences between otherwise 
similar characters. In games with power sets or 
pre-set distinctions, SFX provide ways to 
further define and shape what those traits 
actually represent.
Mary Rose is planning a heroic fantasy game using 
power sets. Two different power sets with the same 
powers, such as Superhuman Strength ⑩ and 
Superhuman Durability ⑩, might be distinguished 
from one another with names like Ogre Blood and 
Forged of Living Iron, but mechanically-speaking 
they’re identical. Using SFX to give Ogre Blood 
something like “Spend a ●
Ⓟ to double an Ogre 
Blood die when engaged in battle with fey” and 
Forged of Living Iron something like “Earn a ●
Ⓟ 
and create a Sinking ⑧ complication when you 
enter any large body of water or liquid” lets Mary 
Rose sharpen these two power sets not just in the 
narrative, but in the game as well.
COUPLE OF KOOKS


=== PAGE 66 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
62
CREATING SFX
One way to look at SFX is as a combination of a cost and 
a benefit. The standard SFX for all distinctions has the 
cost of “use the distinction as a ④” with the benefit of 
“earn a ●
Ⓟ.”
Here’s a list of sample costs to choose from:
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ (very common)
•	 Step down a beneficial die
(usually an attribute, skill, or asset)
•	 Step up a non-beneficial die
(usually a complication)
•	 Choose to do or introduce something
risky/ill-advised/complicated
(“When you walk right into a volatile
situation and start causing trouble…”)
•	 Create a ⑧ complication
•	 Shut down a trait set
(the trait set can’t be used until restored)
Here are some useful benefits:
•	 Earn a ●
Ⓟ
•	 Add a ⑥ to the dice pool
•	 Step up a beneficial die (usually a
specialty or asset, like “step up Pistols”)
•	 Double a beneficial die (usually a
specialty or asset, like “double Pistols”)
•	 Step down a non-beneficial die
(usually a complication)
•	 Introduce a non-mechanical story detail 
(“Hey, I think I know that guy’s brother...”)
•	 Rename a complication
(“I’m not Sickened, I’m Angry”)
•	 Reroll a single die
•	 Create a ⑧ asset for the rest of the scene
Some SFX may switch out the cost for a different sort of 
triggering condition. This can include rolling a heroic 
success, or some roleplaying-based triggering effect.
Mary Rose introduces some SFX in her
TRACE 2.0 police procedural game. One lets a
player double their character’s Move skill die
when they’re in water. Another lets them introduce 
an Obscure Legal Case ⑧ asset in any scene in 
which they’re alone with a law enforcement officer.
SFX often combine both a cost and a triggering condi­
tion, especially if the benefit is broader or more potent 
than usual. In some cases, an SFX may include a narrative 
condition that explains when and how it’s used to give 
context to the SFX.
Tina’s Sage in a fantasy game has an SFX that lets
her spend a ●
Ⓟ to bank two hero dice of a given 
value instead of one, so long as she is engaged in 
battle with her hated foes—goblins. A powerful 
feature (doubling a hero die) has a triggering 
condition (fighting goblins) and a cost (spending
the ●
Ⓟ). It might be too narrow for some groups, 
but for the setting Tina’s playing in (an epic war 
against goblins) it could be a powerful advantage.
STEPPING UP, STEPPING DOWN, 
REROLLING, AND DOUBLING
SFX use these dice tricks a lot, so here’s a summary of 
what these actually mean.
•	 Stepping up means increasing the size of a die by 
one step, i.e. a ⑥ to a ⑧, or a ⑩ to a ⑫.
•	 Stepping down means decreasing the size of a 
die by one step, i.e. a ⑧ to a ⑥, or a ⑫ to a ⑩.
•	 Rerolling means rolling a die or dice again, 
ignoring the previous result and using the
new result.
•	 Doubling a die means adding another die of
the same size to the dice pool before the dice
are rolled.
Aside from rerolling, most SFX tricks affect the unrolled 
dice in the pool, although SFX that call for stepping up or 
stepping down an effect die obviously take place after an 
effect die is chosen.


=== PAGE 67 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 63
LIMITS
A limit is an SFX mod that introduces vulnerabilities that 
provide ●
Ⓟ. A hero is nothing without his flaws and weak­
nesses; most superheroes have an Achilles’ heel, even if 
it’s just that their powers wear them out!
Most limits use the shutdown cost with the earn a ●
Ⓟ 
benefit. With a shutdown cost, there’s always a specific 
situation in which the character can restore the shutdown 
trait, even if it’s just “restore the trait at the beginning of 
the next scene” or something along those lines.
The GM can also activate limits in some circumstances 
by spending a ●
Ⓟ (or doom pool die, if that mod is used). 
If the GM chooses to do this, they should first offer the 
player the option to activate it themselves, in order to gain 
the ●
Ⓟ benefit. If the player decides not to, the option then 
goes to the GM, and the ●
Ⓟ the GM spends goes to the pile, 
not to the player.
Good SFX make it unambiguous when an effect takes 
place, usually after a specific trigger and before the total 
is declared or effect dice are put into play.
THE LOGIC OF SFX
Because SFX are used to break the rules or provide addi­
tional ways to earn and spend ●
Ⓟ, create assets, or alter 
die rolls, they’re a mechanical way to represent special 
abilities, tricks, or maneuvers your character has knowl­
edge of. SFX are best when they allow you to differentiate 
your character from other characters with otherwise 
similar traits, and to flesh out trait sets that form the core 
of a character.
When you use SFX with distinctions, they let you further 
define what a character with that distinction can do 
beyond just getting the ⑧ in a dice pool. When you use 
them with power sets or skills, they allow you to attach 
fun and interesting tricks to those traits without having to 
create narrow or specific traits. And they provide an ideal 
means of tracking character growth, especially when 
they’re used in pre-built character archetypes; distinc­
tions can come with three or more SFX that the player 
can unlock over time and experience.
SIX STANDARD SFX
SFX are the fiddliest part of Cortex Prime and take some 
effort to get right for some players and GMs, so it might 
help to look at the examples of Power SFX in the Prime 
Lists chapter (page 191). In a pinch, however, use one of 
the following SFX that game designer Leonard Balsera 
uses when creating new distinctions.
The Exchange: Step up or double one useful die for the
scene but step down one other die in exchange until you
do a recovery action.
The Price: Step up or double one useful die for the scene
or take a ⑧ asset for the scene (choose one benefit here,
not both), but also take a ⑧ complication.
The Swap: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use a different die than would 
normally be appropriate for a given action, based on
your distinction.
The Edit: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to declare a beneficial thing to be true 
in the fiction, based on your distinction.
The Folly: Earn a ●
Ⓟ when you choose to do something 
detrimental related to the distinction.
The Shutdown: Earn a ●
Ⓟ when you declare that, due to 
appropriate circumstances based on your distinction,
you have lost access to one or more of your attributes/skills/
roles/etc. for the scene and cannot use it for any actions.
ZOE BADINI


=== PAGE 68 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
64
SIGNATURE ASSETS
Some characters have iconic weapons, gear, or pet robots 
that contribute to their dice pools in tests and contests. 
These are signature assets that the character doesn’t have 
to create during play as they “belong” to the character and 
act much like any other trait.
Signature assets work like regular temporary assets—they 
give players an extra die to include in their dice pools 
when they’re able to justify their use. Unlike skills or attri­
butes, they’re about things a PC has or people they know, 
not about qualities innate to them. Not every PC has a 
signature asset, but they’re a great way to further reveal 
a PC’s personality as a means of representing heirlooms 
or unique weapons or special relationships.
Signature assets begin with a ⑥ die rating but can be 
stepped up during play. They aren’t tied to a distinction, 
attribute, or skill, but may complement any one of those 
traits. Some examples of signature assets include:
•	 Organizational Ties: San Narciso County 
Sheriff's Department, Dio Sanchez Gang,
CTRL-ALT-DEL Hacker Collective,
Aurora Hunting Club, Free State Bikers
•	 Vehicles: My Favorite Bike, M1 Abrams Tank, 
Trans-Dimensional Scooter, Souped-Up
Station Wagon
•	 Weapons: Magnum Research Desert Eagle, My 
Grandmother's Sword, Trusty Pew Pew Laser 
Blaster, Louisville Slugger, A Knife (!!!)
•	 Gear: All-Season Thermal Jacket, Talon TSA-
Ready Multitool, Handheld Tablet, Bundle of 
Baling Wire
Signature assets can be left as they are—simply a die 
rating on a character file—or the player can unlock an 
SFX for the asset much like the SFX on distinctions or 
power sets. There’s no default SFX for a signature asset, 
and no two signature assets are the same, so typically 
there needs to be a conversation with the GM about 
appropriate options before one can be added. Typical SFX 
for signature assets allow the player to spend a ●
Ⓟ to step 
up a skill when the signature asset is used with the skill, 
especially when the signature asset is itself a tool of some 
kind. A good rule of thumb is to attach a single SFX to a 
signature asset; if you feel like adding more, there should 
be a limit of three.
Signature assets can be temporarily knocked out, elim­
inated, rendered unusable, or damaged during play by 
actions taken by the group or a GMC; but as they’re a 
featured element of the PC’s file, the player can recover 


=== PAGE 69 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 65
the signature asset between sessions or by spending a ●
Ⓟ 
at the beginning of the next scene (with some narrative 
justification for getting it back/fixed).
Signature assets cannot be shared between PCs; if 
someone “borrows” a signature asset from a charac­
ter (picking up the other character’s heirloom sword or 
driving their custom sports car), the borrower must spend 
a ●
Ⓟ to create an asset as normal to get any benefit from 
the asset borrowed, and the asset is rated at ⑥ like any 
other plot point created asset.
TRAIT STATEMENTS
A statement is a sentence or phrase that clarifies or refines 
the trait that it’s attached to. One or more trait sets may 
be assigned trait statements. They’re especially useful 
when assigned to values, relationships, or attributes. 
They signify which trait sets you want at the center of your 
game’s dramatic tension.
A statement might be something like I’m not afraid of 
danger or Everyone deserves respect (for values), He’s my 
brother from another mother or Why doesn’t she under­
stand me? (for relationships), and Tough as nails or Genius 
runs in the family (for attributes).
CHALLENGING STATEMENTS
Trait statements are narratively similar to distinctions, 
but a statement is a truth about your character that you 
may challenge and then grow from. When you challenge 
a trait with a statement attached to it, you act contrary 
to the statement and your trait die is tripled for that roll.
Once a trait statement is challenged, the trait it’s attached 
to steps down by one. At the end of the session or when­
ever character growth is resolved, that statement must 
either be rewritten to reflect a new belief or truth and the 
die returns to its original rating, or the statement remains 
the same and the die remains stepped down. If the die 
rating is stepped down, it’s likely that another trait must 
be stepped up to balance it out, especially if the trait set 
has a fixed number of assigned steps.
When she does something for someone else at the 
cost of her own safety, Tina’s Sage challenges the 
statement Nobody matters but me! to her Social ⑧ 
attribute. Tina triples her Sage’s Social to ⑧ ⑧ ⑧ 
for the roll, which steps it down to ⑥ for the rest 
of the session. At session’s end, Tina has to decide 
whether to restore her Social ⑥ up to ⑧, in which 
case she needs to rewrite her statement; or to keep 
Social at ⑥ with the statement as it is and step her 
Physical or Mental up by one.
KEKAI KOTAKI


=== PAGE 70 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
66
STATEMENTS AS
DISTINCTION ALTERNATES
As a mod, you could have a Cortex Prime game where trait 
statements replace distinctions entirely. It’s important 
that there still be at least three prime sets so that dice 
pools remain centered around a set of three dice; ensure 
there’s another prime set or sufficient other ways to add 
dice (such as through talents or specialties) so that it 
remains consistent.
TALENTS
A talent is a special trait that doesn’t have a die rating and 
consists of some descriptive or narrative text with an SFX, 
separate from a distinction. Talents are often associated 
with another trait group, such as skills or the roles mod. 
They can also be grouped together based on things such 
as professions, cultures, past experiences, membership 
in a group, faction, or organization, or just thrown into a 
single generic list. In each case, making it easy and quick 
to skim the lists of talents and identify which ones might 
be appropriate during character creation is a good idea.
Talents are helpful in a game where characters from 
similar origins need to be distinct from one another, or 
where the other traits are less numerous or are broad in 
scope. Because talents don’t have a die rating, they’re 
frequently used to boost or accent another trait or series 
of traits that do have die ratings. A talent like Elite Sniper 
might step up both a Shoot skill and a Notice skill under 
specific circumstances.
Most characters in games using talents start with two and 
can add more as part of character growth or advancement.
The following is the standard format for talents.
TALENT NAME
Descriptive text (optional)
Activation: (cost or triggering event)
Effect: (benefit)
Here are three sample talents to show off the breadth of 
options available.
UNRELENTING FORCE
When you steel yourself for trouble, you are a force
of nature.
Activation: The GM gets a heroic success for a GMC 
your PC is engaged in a contest with.
Effect: You ignore the GM’s heroic success if the roll 
beats yours by 5-9, such as the GMC’s effect die being 
stepped up, or being taken out automatically. A roll of 10 
or higher is a normal heroic success.
YOUR SHOELACE IS UNTIED
Your deceptive wit and fast-talk helps you pull the wool over 
your opponent’s eyes.
Activation: You’re engaging in a contest with a major 
GMC or another PC, such as a fight or a battle of wits. 
You spend a ●
Ⓟ.
Effect: For each die the GM keeps in the total after the 
first—including those they keep as a result of spending 
●
Ⓟ—you get a ⑧ asset. You can use this asset in your 
next roll for this contest. The GM may choose not to 
keep a second die when determining their total.
EXAMPLE 1
EXAMPLE 2 
EXAMPLE 3 
HOPELESS ROMANTIC
Everywhere you go, you run into old flames and people 
you’ve romanced before. This can be helpful, but it can also 
be hurtful.
Activation: Introduce or identify a past fling, no more 
than one per scene.
Effect: You get a ⑧ asset linked to that character, but 
the GM gets a ⑧ complication to use on you or one of 
your allies.
GRACE P. FONG


=== PAGE 71 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 67
CREATING 
CHARACTERS
To create a player character for the Cortex Prime RPG, 
players have three options:
•	 Use an archetype to quickly
create an original character.
•	 Build a PC from scratch using
the rules provided.
•	 Use pathways to collaborate on
settings and characters with your group.
You might also introduce some sort of hybrid of the 
three options—have every player pick two back­
grounds (archetypes of a sort), apply the dice and 
traits from those, then “level up” each character 
through a short three-step pathways process to 
generate some backstory, then add a handful of steps 
(the scratch-built method). It’s up to you.
Plan to devote most, if not all, of the first game session 
to creating characters and, in some cases, the setting 
the characters exist in. If you’re using pathways, that’s 
a big chunk of the process.
FORMING CONNECTIONS
Even if the game you’re creating focuses mostly on action 
adventure, connections between the PCs and the world 
you’ve created are crucial.
CONNECTING CHARACTERS TOGETHER
When deciding your method of creating characters, 
remember how important it is for the PCs to share some 
sort of bond, relationship, or background. A Cortex Prime 
game that starts out in the first session with four to six 
completely random characters who happen to be in the 
same place at the same time does stretch credibility. But 
even in that case, there’s no reason you can’t ask each 
player what their PC thinks of the other PCs, based on 
their snap first impression.
Connecting the PCs might only be flavor, but it’s import­
ant. Even if the PCs are supposed to be rivals or enemies, 
they share something that motivates them to get in each 
other’s business. When in doubt, make them all part of 
the same organization, family, or local culture at a specific 
starting event. That often provides players with plenty of 
ideas to link these different backstories together before 
play starts.
CONNECTING CHARACTERS
TO THE SETTING
Once you’ve established that the characters share some­
thing in common with other characters, even if it’s not 
the same backstory for all of them, you can move on to 
the next most important part: the setting.
Characters live in and inhabit their worlds. They belong 
in them and they’ve usually grown up in them, so it’s a 
fair guess to say that each PC has a connection to the
setting’s GMCs, locations, and timeline. You can achieve 
this through the character creation process with discus­
sion around the table, or more formally through a 
pathways method. Cortex Prime games are much stronger 
when players have input into not only their characters, 
but the setting’s specifics as well. If you’re the player who 
named the local bar the Skunk Pangolin, then every time 
the bar is introduced into a session as a location for a 
scene, you feel a sense of ownership.
CREATING THE ENGINEER
We use Amanda’s Engineer, one of Cortex Prime’s iconic 
characters, in our examples for creating characters. Follow 
along in the examples to see how Amanda uses the different 
methods to produce the same character file. The character 
file for the Engineer appears on page 81.
VIKO MENEZES


=== PAGE 72 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
68
Can’t Stay Long, Too Much To Do ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this 
distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.
	
ɪ Full Speed Ahead: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reroll your
dice when time is of the essence.
	
ɬ High Demand: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you leave an 
important scene to help someone rather than
help the people you’re with.
Highlight skills: Drive, Move
ARCHETYPES
An archetype is a partially created character you can use 
to generate your own character quickly. Archetypes have 
background information and suggestions for how to play 
the character, as well as three pre-assigned distinctions, 
pre-assigned attributes or other traits, and a choice of 
two signature assets. Each distinction has the base ④/⑧ 
Hinder SFX already unlocked, and more SFX that may be 
unlocked initially or later in play. The distinctions also list 
highlight skills that are appropriate to that distinction 
and, by implication, that archetype.
HIGHLIGHT SKILLS
If your Cortex Prime game doesn’t use skills, your arche­
types will look a bit different. You might highlight another 
trait, such as roles, or use other methods to step up traits. 
Each distinction in an archetype lists two highlight skills 
that are appropriate for that distinction. If you’re making 
distinctions from scratch, these skills should be chosen 
by the player. If the distinctions are pre-built by the GM 
or included in a specific Spotlight or world setting, they 
should already have their highlight skills provided.
Highlight skills start out at ⑥ rather than ④. If a high­
light skill appears on two distinctions, it starts out as ⑧; 
if it’s on all three distinctions, it starts out as ⑩.
To build a character using an archetype, players:
Select one of the archetypes provided.
Choose two distinction SFX to unlock from
the three distinctions provided.
Select one of the two listed signature assets
for each character.
The archetype uses the skill list common to all characters 
in the game and may include bonus specialties.
EXAMPLE ARCHETYPE: THE ENGINEER
Amanda’s Engineer character is an archetype all by 
herself, so here’s how this might look if she were repre­
sented in a Cortex Prime game that uses attributes, skills, 
distinctions, and signature assets.
Distinctions: (unlock two more SFX)
The World Is My Workshop ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this 
distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Kitbash: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to gain a ⑧ asset for the rest 
of the scene.
	
ɪ Out of Stock: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you declare that you 
don’t have the tools you need to make a repair or 
build something that others are asking you to repair 
or build.
Highlight skills: Fix, Operate
1
2
3
Boundless Curiosity ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this 
distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.
	
ɪ Intriguing: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up or double
your Mental die when you’re making inquiries
or investigating something new.
	
ɪ Killed the Cat: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you poke your
nose into something secret and are discovered.
Highlight skills: Know, Notice
DISTINCTION 1
DISTINCTION 2
DISTINCTION 3
Note: Cortex Prime games with trait mods may use 
slightly different archetypes.
Any skill listed as a highlight skill on the archetype’s 
distinctions starts as a ⑥, not a ④. Once these are 
adjusted, each player has nine additional points to spend 
on stepping up skills. Each point may be spent to step a 
skill die up one step; the GM may set a cap on starting skill 
dice (⑩ is common). In addition to stepping up skills, 
players can assign three specialties to a skill rated ⑥ or 
higher, as well as an additional specialty if Know is rated 
at least ⑥.
Physical
Mental
Social
THE ENGINEER
Ever since you were young,
you knew your path was
creative. You build, you repair, 
you invent, you innovate.
It’s what gives purpose and 
meaning to your life.
YANGTIAN LI


=== PAGE 73 ===
Skills: Step up each highlight skill listed in your distinc­
tions. Then distribute nine more points to the remaining 
skill list. Maximum skill die rating is ⑩. Add the follow­
ing Know specialties: Mechanical Engineering ⑥, 
Electrical Engineering ⑥. Add the following Fix specialty: 
Mechanical ⑥. Choose an additional Know specialty if 
the skill is rated at ⑥ or higher.
Signature Assets: Choose either Engineer’s Goggles ⑧ 
or Crew of Builders ⑧.
•	 SELECT DISTINCTIONS
•	 Select the SFX Kitbash from
The World is My Workshop.
•	 Select the SFX High Demand from
Can’t Stay Long, Too Much To Do.
•	 ADD SPECIALTIES TO YOUR SKILLS
•	 Add the specialties Mechanical Engineering ⑥ 
and Electrical Engineering ⑥ to your
Know ⑧ skill (you can use a bonus ⑥ if 
you use Know on anything that requires 
mechanical or electrical engineering 
know-how).
•	 Add the specialty Mechanical ⑥ to the skill
Fix ⑧ (you can use a bonus ⑥ if you use
Fix on anything mechanical).
•	 Choose additional specialty Physics ⑥ for 
your Know ⑧ skill.
•	 SELECT SIGNATURE ASSET
•	 Choose signature asset,
Engineer’s Goggles ⑧.
THE ENGINEER
Ever since you were young, you knew 
your path was creative. You build, you 
repair, you invent, you innovate.
It’s what gives purpose and meaning
to your life.
1
2
3
YOUR SKILLS AT A GLANCE
Craft ⑧
Drive ⑥
Fight ④
Fix ⑧
(Mechanical ⑥)
Fly ④
Focus ⑥
Influence ④
Know ⑧
(Electrical Engineering ⑥, 
Mechanical Engineering ⑥, 
Physics ⑥)
Labor ④
Move ⑥
Notice ⑥
Operate ⑧
Perform ④
Shoot ⑥
Sneak ⑥
Survive ⑥
Throw ④
Treat ④
Trick ④
SKILL
HIGHLIGHT?
POINTS
FINAL RATING
Craft
---
b b
Drive
YES
---
Fight
---
---
Fix
YES
b
Fly
---
---
Focus
---
b
Influence
---
---
Know
YES
---
Labor
---
---
Move
YES
b
Notice
YES
---
Operate
YES
b
Perform
---
---
Shoot
---
b
Sneak
---
b
Survive
---
b
Throw
---
---
Treat
---
---
Trick
---
---


=== PAGE 74 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
70
SCRATCH-BUILT
Some players prefer to build their own characters rather 
than play an archetype. To scratch-build characters, 
players should do the following.
STAGE 1: ADJUST ATTRIBUTES
All characters start with a ⑧ in each attribute: Mental, 
Physical, and Social. You may step down an attribute 
(from ⑧ to ⑥) to step up a different attribute from ⑧ to 
⑩. No starting characters have an attribute lower than a 
⑥ or higher than a ⑩ at character creation.
STAGE 2: CHOOSE DISTINCTIONS
Choose three distinctions to add to your character file, 
noting the highlight skills associated with each distinc­
tion. Distinctions can represent roles, relationships, 
quirks, personality types, character histories, or any 
other descriptor that helps to flesh out who the PC is in 
the game.
STAGE 3: CHOOSE DISTINCTION SFX
Once you’ve selected distinctions, select your distinction 
SFX. The first three SFX are preselected for players—
they’re all Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this 
distinction’s ⑧ for a ④. Players should choose two addi­
tional SFX. If players design custom distinctions, the 
GM may need to develop new SFX or use SFX from other 
distinctions for the custom distinction. When in doubt, 
pick two of the six standard SFX (page 63).
STAGE 4: STEP UP SKILLS
As with the archetypes, custom characters are given 
nine skill points to step up skills. Before spending those, 
however, step up your skill dice with highlight skills 
listed in your distinctions. If a skill is listed more than 
once across your distinctions, you should step it up one 
for each time it appears (up to a ⑩ skill). Once you’ve 
stepped up those highlight skills, step up skills using skill 
points. Each point steps a skill up by one step.
STAGE 5: CHOOSE SPECIALTIES
AND SIGNATURE ASSETS
Players have five points to assign to specialties and
signature assets at character creation. Each point may 
be used to:
•	 Add a specialty to a skill rated at a ⑥ or higher.
•	 Create a signature asset at a ⑥.
•	 Step up a ⑥ signature asset to a ⑧.
With your five points you might:
•	 Assign 5 specialties and create no signature assets.
•	 Assign 4 specialties and create one
⑥ signature asset.
•	 Assign 3 specialties and create one
⑧ signature asset.
•	 Assign 2 specialties and create three
⑥ signature assets.
•	 Assign 1 specialty and create one
⑧ and two ⑥ signature assets.
STAGE 6: BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION
Last, but certainly not least, add a few details:
Your Name: Pick a favorite name or use an
online name generator.
Background: Where were you born? Where did
you grow up? What is your family like?
What you look like: Got a telltale birthmark? 
Blonde hair? Tall and stout? Short and thin?
To further flesh out your character background, look at 
the distinctions you’ve chosen and think about:
Where you’ve been the last few years.
Where you’re going in the near future.
What you’re doing to keep your head above water.
How you feel about the politics of the world.
EXAMPLE SCRATCH-BUILT CHARACTER: 
THE ENGINEER
Here’s how Amanda puts together her iconic Engineer 
character using the scratch-built method.
Stage One: Amanda assigns a ⑧ to all three attributes. 
She briefly considers stepping up Mental to ⑩ and step­
ping down Social to ⑥, but she’s not really interested in 
the awkward yet brilliant stereotype of an engineer. Her 
character will be well-rounded.
Stage Two: Amanda then chooses three distinctions
(The World Is My Workshop ⑧, Boundless Curiosity ⑧, 
and Can’t Stay Long, Too Much To Do ⑧) and she notes 
that the highlight skills listed with these are Drive, Fix, 
Know, Move, Notice, and Operate.
OPTIONS
Physical
Mental
Social
Base
Example 1
Example 2
Note: If you’re not using attributes and skills, keep 
reading to see how various character mods affect 
this checklist.


=== PAGE 75 ===
Stage Three: Amanda unlocks two SFX out of the remaining 
six options after all three Hinder SFX are unlocked for free. 
She decides on Kitbash (from The World is My Workshop) 
and High Demand (from Can’t Stay Long, Too Much
To Do).
Stage Four: First Amanda steps up her highlight skills one 
step from the base of ④, which gives her Drive ⑥, Fix ⑥, 
Know ⑥, Move ⑥, Notice ⑥, and Operate ⑥. She’s got 9 
skill steps left to assign to skills. She decides to step up Fix, 
Know, and Operate by one more step each, which costs her 
3 steps. Then she puts Craft up to ⑧, which costs another 
2. With the remaining 4 steps she sets Focus, Shoot, Sneak, 
and Survive to ⑥.
Stage Five: The Engineer has a Know skill of at least ⑥ 
so she gets a free ⑥ specialty. She adds Physics ⑥. She’s 
got five points to assign between additional specialties 
and signature assets. She gives the Engineer a pair of 
Engineer’s Goggles ⑧, which costs her 2 points (1 for 
the ⑥ rating, and 1 to step it up from ⑥ to ⑧). Then 
she uses the remaining points to add a Fix specialty 
of Mechanical ⑥, and two more Know specialties of 
Electrical Engineering ⑥ and Mechanical Engineering ⑥.
Stage Six: Here’s the story Amanda assigns to this charac­
ter, with more details probably to come later as she starts 
playing: She’s been everywhere, she’s fixed everything, but 
she still has so much more she wants to do. The Engineer 
retains her wide-eyed wonder at the universe even as she 
draws on her experiences to keep her grounded.
CHARACTER BUILDING 
WITH OTHER TRAITS
Many Cortex Prime worlds use variations on the base­
line traits, and building characters differs slightly when 
powers and power sets are added to the game, or attributes 
are replaced by affiliations. In each case, the number of 
options within each trait set is a good indicator of which 
dice to assign and whether there’s a default rating. What 
follows are guidelines for implementing trait mods into 
character building.
AFFILIATIONS
Start out with a ⑧ in all three, with (if there are more than 
three) a ⑥ for any additional affiliation.
ATTRIBUTES
The baseline is three at ⑧. If you have a longer list, each 
additional attribute beyond the first three starts out at ⑥.
VIKO MENEZES


=== PAGE 76 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
72
RESOURCES
If you’re not using a relationship map like pathways to 
establish shared resources in your game, you can still 
implement resources by allowing them to be purchased 
in a scratch-built character. Resources cost one specialty 
or signature asset point in stage 5. This gives you a ⑥⑥ 
resource with two tags. Spending additional points can 
either give you another resource, step up a resource’s dice 
by one step (⑥⑥ to ⑧ ⑧) or increase the number of dice 
(⑥⑥ to ⑥⑥⑥).
Resources of greater than ⑧ ⑧ or ⑥⑥⑥ are not recom­
mended. It’s better to add more resources to a character 
than invest more than 2 points in a single resource.
ROLES
Characters using roles instead of skills ignore stage 4 and 
assign the following based on how many roles are used 
in the game:
•	 Three roles: ⑩, ⑧, and ④.
•	 Four roles: ⑩, ⑧, ⑥, and ④.
•	 Five roles: ⑩, ⑧, ⑥, ⑥, and ④.
•	 Six roles: ⑩, ⑧, ⑥, ⑥, ⑥, and ④.
SKILL AND SPECIALTY SPLIT
Using this mod, assign points as noted in stage 4 to 
skills, but no skill may be advanced above ⑥ except as a
specialty. Points later assigned in stage 5 may also be used 
to step up those specialties but may not be used to step 
a ④ skill up to a ⑥ skill. Therefore, the 9 points from 
stage 4 and any bonus steps from highlight skills from 
distinctions are the only way to raise a skill from ④ to ⑥.
TALENTS
Choose talents from a list provided by the GM or the 
world, or create them from scratch using the SFX rules, 
during stage 3. Players usually start with 2 talents, linked 
thematically to either the highest rated role or skill, or 
some other important trait.
TRAIT STATEMENTS
If using trait statements, write these during the last stage 
once you have a good grasp of the other PCs and the 
overall direction of your character.
VALUES
When using values, dice are assigned to them during 
stage 1. Assign ⑧ for the first three, and ⑥ for the rest, 
with the option to step values up by stepping others down. 
Usually this looks like one at ⑩, one at ④, two at ⑧, and 
the rest at ⑥.
MULTI-LEVEL SPECIALTIES
With this mod, in stage 5 you can step up specialties from 
⑥ instead of adding additional ⑥ specialties. Starting 
characters rarely start out with ⑫ specialties.
POWERS
If your game uses powers and power sets, assigning 
powers to characters depends in large part on the scope 
of super-powered characters in the world the game is 
set in. If superhuman characters are common, in stage 
3 every character gets two power sets, each with two SFX 
and one limit. If they’re rare, drop this to one power set, 
or offer the choice of a power set or 5 additional points in 
skills, talents, etc. A player might choose to drop a power 
set entirely in order to add an SFX to another and increase 
their starting number of powers by one.
The number of actual powers within those power sets also 
varies based on the game. A good rule of thumb is that 
each character should start with a number of ⑧ powers 
equal to the number of power sets plus one. Stepping up 
powers uses the same points used for specialties in stage 
5, and powers may be stepped down to step others up. No 
power should start above ⑩ unless the game features 
godlike heroes. No power may be stepped down below 
⑥; if it is, the power trait goes away.
More SFX may be added in the same way that distinction 
SFX are added or switched out. If using powers, the game 
shouldn’t use SFX with distinctions at all to avoid clutter­
ing up the character file and making it too busy.
Tweak all of these guidelines as needed.
RELATIONSHIPS
When assigning relationships, most PCs should have a 
relationship with each other PC at ⑥ for free. Step these 
up using the points in stage 5 that otherwise are used to 
step up signature assets or add specialties. Alternately, 
set one relationship at ⑩, one at ⑧, and the rest at ⑥. 
Assign a relationship to any GMCs the players might want 
to have a relationship with to start the game.
REPUTATIONS
See relationships, above. It’s often a good idea to cap the 
die ratings of reputations during character creation to 
something that matches the level of notoriety or fame you 
expect the PCs to start with.
Mary Rose decides to set the cap for reputations in 
her game to ⑧, giving her players a reputation at
⑧, two at ⑥, and all others at ④. During play,
any of her players might step up their reputations
to ⑩ or even ⑫.


=== PAGE 77 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 73
PATHWAYS
Pathways is an interactive and collaborative setting and 
character creation process. It creates a kind of map that 
shows the connections between characters, places, 
events, and objects and helps provide the basis of a Cortex 
Prime series. It’s best to set aside an entire session for it, 
and it’s intended for use in a long-term series. Pathways 
is excellent for creating the setting within which the 
players create their characters using either of the two
previous methods.
Each stage in the pathways process can be used to assign 
some of the points or steps that create a character beyond 
their starting values. If you know you need to assign a total 
of 9 points to skills, and you’re using 9 stages, have each 
player assign one point to a skill each stage. Use major 
stages to decide things like distinctions; use meta stages 
to pick abilities or power sets. On every stage, including 
a standard stage, choose to step up skills and attributes, 
add specialties, and so forth. The default pathways table 
has guidelines for choosing traits. 
GETTING STARTED
Pathways requires the group to have some idea what the 
game will be about, and each player should have at least a 
basic character concept. A shared understanding of what 
you want the game to be is important to ensure that the 
elements the players pick work with the intended setting 
and tone. In creating the pathways map, players have a 
lot of freedom to create or introduce characters, organi­
zations, and situations, so it’s important to be on the same 
page about what’s suitable for the game.
If you meet in person you’ll need a large piece of paper 
(or some other surface you can write on), and if you meet 
online you’ll need a shared drawing tool.
PLAYER CHARACTERS (RECTANGLES)
First draw a rectangle for each player, and draw lines 
between each of the rectangles. This is the foundation of 
your pathways map.
ROUND ROBIN SETTING CREATION
The idea is simple: go around the table taking turns adding 
ideas to the game’s setting and adding traits to your char­
acter until you have the “play area” of your campaign and 
a set of characters connected to it. If the group finds any 
created element problematic, you can ask the person who 
suggested it to change it or come up with something else.
MAPPING TIPS
The story map you create in pathways can very quickly 
get complicated and confusing. Here are a couple of tips:
If you have a small number of player characters, placing 
the rectangles representing them towards the outside of 
the map can make things a little easier.
If need be, you can put “warp zones” on the map. Put an 
A in a circle in two places to indicate a jump, and then 
move on to B and so on as needed.
ENGINEER
SAGE
HERO
Map in Progress
A
A
B
B
ELEMENTS
The pathways map consists of several different kinds of 
elements. These can be relationships, characters, assets, 
situations, etc. By themselves, elements don’t concern 
characters’ actual abilities, though they can imply a whole 
lot, and in story terms can help reinforce a character’s 
traits. Some archetypes imply a school that might serve as 
a location or a mentor who can be a secondary character; 
membership in an elite organization helps show that the 
character is in fact an elite.
CONNECTIONS (LINES)
Connections are the links between things, and thus 
they’re represented by lines between different elements. 
Each connection should end up with a description written 
along the length of the line. These descriptions don’t need 
to be detailed, but they do need to explain what joins the 
two elements together. A connection might imply the 
existence of a relationship trait, if your game uses those.
Examples: Business rivalry, has a crush on, uses for 
transportation, has terrible nightmares about
ENGINEER
HERO
GREW UP TOGETHER
COMMON GOALS


=== PAGE 78 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
74
SECONDARY CHARACTERS (CIRCLES)
Secondary characters are the people and other actors that 
take part in the story. These will become important GMCs 
and can range from valued friends to desperate enemies.
Examples: Classmate, Colleague, Lover, Parent, 
Sibling, Teammate
Extras are minor characters that make themselves useful 
to a character in some way. Unlike secondary charac­
ters, relationships with extras are pragmatic. They can 
be contacts that provide information or services, or just 
flunkies at a character’s beck and call. Extras can include 
a group of people, such as a squad of soldiers, who mostly 
act as one character in the story.
Examples: Alchemist, Doctor, Gadget Guy, Scholar, 
Scientist, Security Team, Servant, Soldiers
Organizations are established groups of various kinds. 
Depending on the scope of your campaign, this could 
range anywhere from a powerful government to a school 
club. Think about how your character relates to a given 
organization.
Examples: Army, Corporation, Government Agency, 
Religion, Research Facility, Secret Society,
Thieves Guild
A prop is an object of major importance to the story. It’s 
most likely a MacGuffin in the classic sense—a thing that 
the characters desire enough that it helps drive conflicts. 
Props are usually, but not always, signature assets.
A prop element doesn’t necessarily mean a character gets 
to possess some particularly powerful thing. A sword that 
people would fight wars over might not have the slightest 
hint of magic if it’s got the right history behind it.
Examples: Autographed Baseball, Crown Jewels, 
Legendary Sword, Magical Key, Special Formula, 
Suitcase Everyone Wants, Vial of the Z Virus,
Vitally Important Data Crystal
Locations are places of significance to the characters.
A location can be a place they specifically own or control, 
or just a place that’s somehow significant to their affairs.
A team’s secret base, the bar a character owns, and a pizza 
place where they hang out can all be locations.
Examples: Bar, Bowling Alley, Café, Mansion, 
Military Base, Newspaper Office, Restaurant,
School, Store
SITUATIONS (TRIANGLES)
A situation is an event or potential event that’s import­
ant to the character(s) in some way, whether it’s a past 
event that shapes them, something currently ongoing, 
or a possible future problem.
Examples: Occupation, Pending Invasion, Pogrom, 
Power Manifestation, Questionable Experiments
RESOURCE (DIAMONDS)
A resource is something in the world connected to the 
character. Resources connected to your character aren’t 
necessarily ones they can use—resources cover plenty of 
things that could be adversarial to or simply desirable to 
a character—so make it clear in the connection how the 
resource relates to your character. There are four differ­
ent kinds of resource: extras, organizations, props, and 
locations. They can be used purely as setting creation 
tools or may be represented as traits on a player’s char­
acter file (see “Resources” on page 56).
TESSA
CYRIL
YOLANDA
MOTHER
EX-GIRLFRIEND
APPRENTICE
ENGINEER
NEW
STEAM
AGE
CIVIL 
UNREST
BORN AND 
LIVING DURING 
THIS TIME
BREAKS OUT 
WHILE A 
YOUNG ADULT
ENGINEER
HMS
ASTONISH
WORKERS’
UNION
ENGINEER’S
GOGGLES
STEAM 
CITY
ENGINEER
FIRST GREAT 
INVENTION
HELPS HER 
WORK
WHERE SHE 
STILL LIVES
SHARES WITH 
THE HERO AND 
THE SAGE
MANY SAW 
HER GROW UP
BASE OF 
OPERATIONS
BORN AND 
RAISED
FAMILY ARE 
MEMBERS


=== PAGE 79 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 75
STAGES
During pathways, players go through a series of stages 
that represent different periods in the characters’ lives. 
Different characters’ stages don’t necessarily correlate in 
time, so a 200-year-old elf and a 2-week-old robot could 
still go through the same number of stages if it comes to 
that. Instead, the stages represent more the thrust of their 
formative experiences and connections. On the other 
hand, if your game is based around several pivotal events, 
you could deliberately make each stage correspond to a 
particular time period.
The number of stages the group goes through determines 
the complexity of the resulting pathways map and how 
long it takes to create. Five stages make for a good average. 
The pathways table in this section has a suggested default 
pattern of stages, but of course you can customize it to 
your tastes. We get into the types of stages in a moment, 
but the first and last stages should be major stages.
Your map should already have rectangles for all the PCs, 
with their names inside them, and lines connecting each 
PC to all the others.
USING THE PATHWAYS TABLE
On our default pathways table, each stage has five choices. 
Beginning with Origin and going all the way down to
Life-Changing Event, your choice for the next stage must 
be directly below the choice you made in the current 
stage, or the choice to the left or right of that one. So, from 
the Gifted Origin (stage 1), you could pick Average, Geek, 
or Outsider for your Youth (stage 2).
TAKING TURNS
It isn’t absolutely necessary to have the players take turns 
adding elements to the map, but it does makes things less 
confusing. For each element allowed in a stage (major 
and meta stages have two each), go around the table once 
letting each player add their element.
TYPES OF STAGES
There are three types of stages—standard, major, and 
meta—that work a little differently in terms of what kinds 
of elements players get to add.
VIKO MENEZES


=== PAGE 80 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
76
STANDARD STAGE
During a standard stage, each player gets to connect their 
character to an element. You can draw a connection from 
your character to an existing element, or you can add a 
new character, resource, or situation to the map and draw 
a connection from it to your character.
The following stages count as standard: Youth, Road,
Priority, Motivation.
Use a standard stage to gain a resource, signature asset, 
skill, or specialty based on the element you’ve just 
connected. You can add a new one at ⑥ or step up an 
existing one by one step.
MAJOR STAGE
A major stage represents a major turning point in the 
characters’ lives. During a major stage each player adds 
two new elements instead of one, drawing connections to 
them, but otherwise it works like standard stage. Roughly 
one out of every 3 stages should be a major stage.
The following are major stages: Origin, Life-Changing 
Event, Identity.
Use a major stage to gain a resource, signature asset, skill, 
or specialty just as with a standard stage, but also define 
and add a distinction.
META STAGE
In a meta stage, the players also get to play with other 
aspects of the pathways map. In addition to adding one 
new element like in a standard stage, each player gets to 
do one of the following things:
•	 Draw a connection between any two non-PC 
elements and define a relationship between them.
•	 Destroy a connection between their PC and 
a given element and add a new element and 
connection. This implies that something happened 
to sever one connection and foster another.
•	 Introduce an element for another PC. The other 
player defines the nature of their characters’ 
connection with that element however.
One out of every 4 or 5 stages should be a meta stage.
The following are meta stages: Focus, Modus Operandi.
Use a meta stage to gain a resource, signature asset, skill, 
or specialty as well as a new distinction, just as with a 
major stage. Also add a power set or ability if you’re using 
those traits. If you add a power set, you can now add 
powers on future standard or major stages.
STAGE
TYPE
TITLE
A
B
C
D
E
1
Major
Origin
Rich
Ordinary
Gifted
Strange
Alien
2
Standard
Youth
Jock
Average
Geek
Outsider
Paragon
3
Meta
Focus
Money
Life
Status
Technology
Paranormal
4
Standard
Road
Risky
Straight
& Narrow
Lofty
Underground
Ethical
5
Major
Life-Changing
Event
Advancement
Tragedy
Manifestation
First Contact
Destiny
6
Standard
Priority
Friends & Family
Work
Moving Forward
Looking Back
Performance
7
Meta
Modus 
Operandi
Loyalty
Shady Business
Against the Grain
Outside Normal
Channels
Special Gifts
8
Standard
Motivation
Others
Self
The Cause
The Job
The World
9
Major
Identity
The Sidekick
The Foil
The Rebel
The Specialist
The Hero
ENGINEER’S
GOGGLES
ENGINEER
GAIN
SIGNATURE ASSET
HMS
ASTONISH
ENGINEER
UNLOCK DISTINCTION
The World is my Workshop
ENGINEER
UNLOCK SPECIALTY
Physics ADDED TO Fix
CIVIL 
UNREST
ENGINEER
UNLOCK DISTINCTION
Boundless Curiosity
YOLANDA


=== PAGE 81 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 77
DEFAULT PATHWAYS TABLE
The default table has nine pre-built stages that form a 
narrative background. Start with the first five stages, then 
decide if you want to progress to the remaining four for 
a more experienced group. Here are brief descriptions of 
the stages to inspire your own pathways tables.
•	 Origin: Where did you come from? Was your 
family rich, or ordinary? Was your family blessed 
with gifts, or just strange? Were you an alien 
(another planet, another country)?
•	 Youth: What sort of childhood did you have? 
Were you a jock, a geek, or just average? Were 
you an outsider among your peers, or a paragon 
in your community?
•	 Focus: What sort of goals and values were 
instilled in you as you grew up? Was it money, a 
good life, or elevated status? Was it a dedication 
to technology or involvement in the paranormal?
•	 Road: What path did you walk as you emerged 
from your youth? Was it risky, or on the straight 
and narrow? Did you tread a lofty road above 
others, or stay underground and out of sight? Was 
it a road governed by ethics or a code of honor?
•	 Life-Changing Event: Something changed your 
life forever. Was it the thrill of advancement, the 
sting of tragedy, or the manifestation of a hidden 
power? Did you contact something beyond your 
ken, or come face to face with your destiny?
•	 Priority: What goals do you set above all others? 
Friends and family or hard work? Moving forward 
in your life, looking back at your achievements, or 
concentrating on your own performance?
•	 Modus Operandi: How do you achieve your 
goals? Do you stay loyal, engage in shady business, 
or go against the grain? Do you rely on outside 
channels, or your own special gifts?
•	 Motivation: What keeps you going? Is it other 
people, yourself, or a cause that’s bigger than 
you? Is it your job, whatever that is, or the world 
around you?
•	 Identity: Where do you see yourself in the 
unfolding drama of your life? Are you the sidekick, 
or the foil to others? Are you the rebel of the 
group, the specialist who does one thing really 
well, or are you the hero of the piece?
DOES THE GM GET A TURN?
Chances are the map is more than sufficiently large and 
convoluted at the end of pathways with just the players 
adding to it, but if as the GM you want to have some 
creative input into the whole thing, you can fill in your 
ideas on each stage as per a player, adding new elements 
that relate to the PCs and GMCs.
As the GM you don’t have your own character, so you can 
add elements connected to whatever you like.
USING THE FINISHED MAP
The pathways map will provide you with plenty of ideas, 
but it still takes a little thought to fully flesh out the story.
TRIANGULAR RELATIONSHIPS
One key thing to look for on the pathways map is places 
where multiple characters have conflicting connec­
tions with a given element. The classic love triangle is an 
obvious example, but anything where connections are at 
odds is a potential place to make things more interesting.
WEDGES
The GM, whose job is to drive the conflicts in the game, 
can look at the pathways map and look for places to drive 
wedges, to threaten and mess with existing relationships. 
If there’s a triangular connection, look for something to 
exacerbate it. Even if a connection is non-triangular, you 
can find interesting ways to mess it up.
IMPLIED ELEMENTS
The pathways map covers most of the major elements 
that go into the game, but it can’t be truly comprehensive. 
An organization has leaders and members, characters 
have other characters around them, locations have any 
number of people associated with them, and so on. While 
the map is a very useful tool, it shouldn’t limit what you 
bring into the game.
LATE ADDITIONS
The simplest way for a player with a new character to be 
introduced to the game is to just run through the same 
stages as for the original PCs. That gives them plenty of 
opportunities to give their character connections to exist­
ing elements, as well as to add some new ones.
It’s up to you whether you want the new PC to start off 
with connections to all the other PCs. Sometimes this 
makes perfect sense, and other times it’s tricky to pull 
off, so you may want to have a new character start without 
connections to other PCs until the player draws them in 
(though in that case you may want to give them a couple 
extra element choices).
ENGINEER
SAGE
HERO
HATES THEIR GUTS
THINKS SHE IS CREEPY
TOO INTENSE
TOO STUBBORN
NEEDS TO 
LIGHTEN UP
SCATTER-BRAINED


=== PAGE 82 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
78
EXAMPLE PATHWAYS CHARACTER:
THE ENGINEER
Amanda and her friends are creating a collaborative 
steampunk setting with Mary Rose as the GM, and they’ve 
decided to use pathways to do it. They’re using the first 
five stages of the default table to draw the pathways map. 
Mary Rose has compressed all the character creation 
steps into those five stages, so she lets the players know 
what traits they’ll be choosing at each stage. 
•	 Origin (Major): All players choose their first 
distinction, step up the highlight skills plus two 
additional skill steps anywhere they like, and
add a specialty or a signature asset. All three 
attributes start at ⑥.
•	 Youth (Standard): All players get two skill steps 
and a specialty or signature asset and may step 
one attribute up by one.
•	 Focus (Meta): All players choose their second 
distinction, step up the highlight skills plus two 
additional skill steps anywhere they like, and add a 
specialty or signature asset. One SFX is unlocked.
•	 Road (Standard): All players get two more skill 
steps and a specialty or signature asset and may 
step up an attribute by one.
•	 Life-Changing Event (Major): All players choose 
their third distinction, step up the highlight skills 
plus one additional skill by one, add a specialty or 
signature asset, and unlock a second SFX. They 
get their third and final attribute step.
Let’s see what Amanda chooses as everyone around the 
table takes their turns. Amanda’s Engineer, Adam’s Hero, 
and Tina’s Sage are all rectangles on the map, with lines 
linking them together.
First Stage: Origin is a major stage and it represents 
the genesis of Amanda’s Engineer. She gets to add two 
elements to the map and connect to them with lines, so 
she adds a triangle for the situation New Steam Age, a 
circle for Yolanda, her mother, and draws lines to both 
of them from her rectangle. Her pick for origin is Gifted: 
Amanda says her Engineer was born with a wrench in 
one hand and eyes wide to the world of science around 
her. The distinction she chooses is Boundless Curiosity, 
which steps up Know and Notice to ⑥. She steps up Know 
again to ⑧, and Craft up to ⑥. Know comes with a free 
specialty at ⑥, so she adds Physics, and uses her specialty 
or signature asset step to add Electrical Engineering ⑥. 
All of her Engineer’s attributes are set to a starting ⑥.
Second Stage: Youth is a standard stage. Here Amanda 
adds a location to her pathways map, Steam City, and 
connects it to her character rectangle. Amanda looks 
at the pathways chart and sees that her choices for her 
Engineer are Average, Geek, and Outsider. While Geek 
seems the most obvious, Amanda wants to have a more 
well-rounded character, so she chooses Outsider. Born 
with obvious talents, her Engineer’s youth in Steam City 
was sheltered because of her non-technologically inclined 
family. She mostly stayed out of other people’s way while 
pursuing her gifts. She gets two skill steps, and puts them 
into Focus and Sneak, raising them to ⑥. She also adds 
Mechanical Engineering ⑥ as a specialty for Know and 
steps up her Physical attribute to ⑧.
STAGE 1
Physical
Mental
Social
THE ENGINEER
Born to Yolanda during the New 
Steam Age, her natural sense of 
curiosity and giftedness made 
her seek to understand the 
world around her.
+Boundless Curiosity
Know ④ steps up to ⑥ (unlocks a free specialty) 
Notice ④ steps up to ⑥
+2 ADDITIONAL SKILL STEPS
Know ⑥ steps up to ⑧, Craft ④ steps up to ⑥
+1 SPECIALTY OR SIGNATURE ASSET
Physics ⑥ added to Know ⑧ (free from distinction)
Electrical Engineering ⑥ added to Know ⑧
STAGE 2
+2 ADDITIONAL SKILL STEPS
Focus ④ steps up to ⑥, Sneak ④ steps up to ⑥
+1 SPECIALTY OR SIGNATURE ASSET
Mechanical Engineering ⑥ added to Know ⑧
+1 TO AN ATTRIBUTE
Physical ⑥ stepped up to ⑧
Physical
Mental
Social
THE ENGINEER
Raised in a family that didn’t 
understand her interests 
and talents, the Engineer felt 
isolated and longed to be part 
of the innovation of Steam City.
YOLANDA
NEW
STEAM
AGE
ENGINEER
ENGINEER
STEAM 
CITY
HERO


=== PAGE 83 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 79
Third Stage: Focus is a meta stage and where Amanda’s 
Engineer begins to come into her own as a mechani­
cal prodigy. She adds a prop, her Engineer’s Goggles, 
to her pathways map, connected with a line; she also 
connects her character rectangle to a situation triangle 
Adam created earlier, Civil Unrest. Her focus is clearly 
Technology, and Amanda adds The World is My Workshop 
distinction together with the two highlighted skills, Fix 
and Operate, each of which step up to ⑥. She adds the 
Engineer’s Goggles as a signature asset at ⑥, and can step 
up two more skills, choosing to step up Fix and Operate 
again to ⑧. At this stage she can unlock her first SFX, 
and goes for Kitbash (under The World is My Workshop).
Fourth Stage: Road is a standard stage and Amanda 
draws a connection to an element Tina had added to 
the pathways map earlier, the airship HMS Astonish; 
it’s another location (albeit one that travels around the 
globe). Her road is Underground, meaning the shadowy 
or secret lifestyle outside of the mainstream of Steam City: 
The Engineer travels with the Sage and the Hero in their 
airship, righting wrongs caused by the Clockwork Empire. 
She spends her two skill steps on Craft and Survive, adds 
Mechanical as a specialty to Fix, and steps up her Mental 
attribute by one to ⑧.
Fifth Stage: Life-Changing Event is a major stage. 
Amanda picks First Contact—an encounter with the 
mysterious Luminescent Beings cements her future as 
the world’s premier Engineer. She draws them on the 
pathways map, connected to her with a line; she’s real­
ized that the world is more than she imagined, with other 
worlds and other intelligent forms of life. She picks her 
final distinction, Can’t Stay Long, Too Much To Do, and 
unlocks the High Demand SFX. The distinction gives her 
steps in Drive and Move, both now ⑥. One more skill step 
goes to Shoot, making it a ⑥. Her final attribute step 
raises her Social to ⑧ like the other two. With the last 
signature asset or specialty step, she steps up Engineer's 
Goggles to ⑧, and the Engineer is complete except for 
the finishing touches.
STAGE 4
+2 ADDITIONAL SKILL STEPS
Craft ⑥ steps up to ⑧, Survive ④ steps up to ⑥
+1 SPECIALTY OR SIGNATURE ASSET
Mechanical ⑥ added to Fix ⑧
+1 TO AN ATTRIBUTE
Mental ⑥ stepped up to ⑧
Physical
Mental
Social
THE ENGINEER
Operating just under the
radar of society, she travels 
around the world with her 
companions to fight against
the Clockwork Empire.
ENGINEER
ENGINEER’S
GOGGLES
CIVIL 
UNREST
Physical
Mental
Social
THE ENGINEER
Her first invention of her 
distinctive goggles marks a 
breakthrough in what will be an 
incredible journey of discovery 
and invention.
STAGE 3
+The World is My Workshop
Fix ④ steps up to ⑥, Operate ④ steps up to ⑥
+2 ADDITIONAL SKILL STEPS
Fix ⑥ steps up to ⑧, Operate ⑥ steps up to ⑧
+1 SPECIALTY OR SIGNATURE ASSET
Engineer’s Goggles ⑥ added as a signature asset
+1 UNLOCKED SFX
Kitbash unlocked under The World is My Workshop
HMS
ASTONISH
STEAM 
CITY
ENGINEER
SAGE
HERO
ENGINEER
LUMINESCENT
BEINGS
STAGE 5
+Can’t Stay Long, Too Much To Do
Drive ④ steps up to ⑥, Move ④ steps up to ⑥
+1 ADDITIONAL SKILL STEP
Shoot ④ steps up to ⑥
+1 SPECIALTY, SIGNATURE ASSET
Engineer’s Goggles ⑥ stepped up to ⑧
+1 UNLOCKED SFX
High Demand unlocked under Can’t Stay Long, Too 
Much to Do
Physical
Mental
Social
THE ENGINEER
A pivotal point in her journey 
is her encounter with the 
mysterious Luminescent 
Beings, who prove that the 
world is bigger than it seems.


=== PAGE 84 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
80
COMPLETED EXAMPLE
PATHWAYS MAP
LUMINESCENT
BEINGS
YOLANDA
NEW
STEAM
AGE
ENGINEER’S
GOGGLES
RECTANGLE:
Player Character
TRIANGLE:
Situation
RED LINE: Engineer’s Connection
GREEN LINE: Other PC’s Connection
DASHED LINE: Other PC’s Connections 
and Resources (not filled out for the 
purpose of this example map).
CIRCLE:
Secondary Character
DIAMOND:
Resource


=== PAGE 85 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
81
SIGNATURE ASSETS
Engineer’s Goggles ⑧
THE ENGINEER
She’s been everywhere, she’s fixed everything, but she still has so 
much more she wants to do. The Engineer retains her wide-eyed 
wonder at the universe even as she draws on her experiences to 
keep her grounded.
The World Is My Workshop ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this 
distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Kitbash: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to gain a ⑧ asset
for the rest of the scene.
Boundless Curiosity ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this 
distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.
Can’t Stay Long, Too Much To Do ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this 
distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ High Demand: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you leave an 
important scene to help someone rather than
help the people you’re with.
DISTINCTIONS
Mental
Social
Physical
ATTRIBUTES
SKILLS
Fight
Fly
Perform
Labor
Throw
Treat
Trick
Influence
Drive
Focus
Shoot
Sneak
Survive
Move
Notice
Craft
Fix
Mechanical ⑥
Know
Electrical Engineering ⑥
Mechanical Engineering ⑥
Physics ⑥
Operate
YANGTIAN LI


=== PAGE 86 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
82
GROWING 
CHARACTERS
While PCs start out as competent, experienced profes­
sionals, they change and grow during play, with each job 
they take giving them more to grow on. The more adven­
tures the group undertakes, the more benefits they can 
enjoy and the richer their backstory becomes.
All of these methods of growing characters are mods. You 
can play many games of Cortex Prime without growth of 
any sort outside of the kind that happens in the story or 
fiction. Many Cortex Prime characters are just fine as they 
are for several sessions, and if you’re doing a one-shot or 
limited session story, you won’t worry much about growth 
either. However, many players love to change things about 
their characters, so you should—as a group—decide how 
you want growth to work in your Cortex Prime game.
SESSION RECORDS
With this mod, at the end of each session, the players 
make a note of the session’s name on their character file. 
This is the PC’s personal session record, and over time 
it provides an account of the group’s accomplishments 
and checkered past.
CALLBACKS
Each player may use their own session record to make 
callbacks, references to events from other sessions that 
may be useful towards the current storyline. To make a 
callback, have your PC make an in-character reference to 
a session in their session record while performing a task. 
While the name of the session might be referenced explic­
itly, it’s more evocative to say something like “This is just 
like that time in Montana….” When you use a callback, 
you may gain a benefit immediately for anything that a 
●
Ⓟ could be used for—activating an SFX, keeping an extra 
die result in your total, or creating an asset to reflect your 
PC’s previous experiences with the task.
You can only make a callback to a specific session once 
per session. A checkbox next to each session is useful for 
this purpose. Erase the checked boxes when a new session 
begins and add the last session’s name to the record.
TRAINING UP
By spending sessions from your record, you can make 
permanent improvements to your PC. A spent session 
remains on the record but can no longer be used for call­
backs or to train a second time.
•	 Turn an asset from a session into a signature 
asset (or relationship): 1 session
•	 Switch out a distinction (or trait statement) 
for a new one: 1 session
•	 Step up a signature asset (or relationship):
2 sessions
•	 Add a new specialty: 2 sessions
•	 Unlock a new SFX: 2 sessions
•	 Step up a skill (or resource, role, value,
or power): 3 sessions
•	 Step up one attribute (or affiliation)
and step down another: 4 sessions
Training can happen anytime during downtime between 
sessions. Maximum die ratings of ⑫ apply in all cases to 
skills, attributes, and assets. If you switch out a distinc­
tion, your new distinction has as many SFX unlocked as 
the original, although they may be entirely different SFX.


=== PAGE 87 ===
GROWTH
The best dramatic heroes grow with the story and are 
changed by the challenges they face. Indeed, to some, 
that’s the very definition of a hero—or, at the very least, 
a protagonist. Even antagonists, if they’re interesting, 
change over the arc of their story.
With this mod, PCs gain new traits and advance current 
traits through a mechanism called the growth pool, 
which is a pool of dice you build up over the course of 
the game. This method uses the Trait Statements mod 
(page 65) extensively but can be adapted in other ways 
depending on your game.
You can get dice for the growth pool in two ways:
•	 Challenging a trait statement.
•	 Successfully recovering stress or complications 
with someone else’s help.
You can then use that growth pool to add new traits 
or improve existing ones at the end of the session, in a 
special kind of scene called a tag scene.
TAG SCENES
At the end of every session you have the opportunity to 
do a special kind of scene called a tag scene, where you 
can try to improve your character’s traits.
Tag scenes shouldn’t be very long—just enough narra­
tion for everyone to get an idea of how you want your PC 
to change. After that, you get to do two things: rewrite 
statements and step up traits.
See Prime Scenes for more information on types of scenes, 
including tag scenes.
REWRITING STATEMENTS
For every trait statement you’ve challenged in the session, 
you get to make a choice: did your PC change perspec­
tives? If so, you can rewrite your statement to reflect your 
new belief about the trait and put it back to its original die 
rating. Jason would never let me down ⑧ might become 
Jason isn’t the friend I thought he was ⑧ or Jason will 
answer to me ⑧.
If your PC didn’t change perspectives, you can keep the 
statement the same, but the trait it’s attached to must stay 
at the reduced die rating. For values or other traits that 
share a fixed number of steps, pick another value or values 
to increase by that same amount, so your total number of 
die steps remains the same. So, if you stepped down Love 
from ⑩ to ⑥ (two steps) during a session and decide to 
stay there, you’d pick one value to step up by two, or two 
values to step up by one.
For relationships or other traits that aren’t governed by a 
fixed number of steps, if you stay at the lowered die rating, 
add another die to your growth pool equal to the new die 
rating. So, if you stepped down Jason from ⑧ to ④, you’d 
add a ④ to growth in addition to the ⑧ you added when 
you originally challenged it.
STEPPING UP TRAITS
You may select one trait to step up or pick a new one to 
add. New traits begin at ④. You can’t step a trait up higher 
than ⑫.
To raise the trait, you must succeed at a test. You roll your 
growth pool plus the highest stress or complication you 
had during the session, even if it was recovered. The GM 
sets the difficulty at one die equal to the trait level you 
want to step up to and a second die based on what kind 
of trait it is:
•	 Attribute or Affiliation ⑫
•	 Distinction, Role, or Power ⑩
•	 Skill, SFX, or Value ⑧
•	 Relationship, Resource,
or Signature Asset ⑥
Unlike other tests, you can’t use ●
Ⓟ to affect the outcome 
of this one. Ignore all hitches. If you win, you get to step 
up your trait or add a new one and the dice in the growth 
pool are used up. If you lose or tie, you can do it anyway, 
but you have to step something else down to compensate; 
the dice in the growth pool stick around for next session.
JANNA SOPHIA


=== PAGE 88 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS
84
MILESTONES
Milestones are an alternate way to track progress and 
earn experience points (XP) that players then use to 
unlock character upgrades, as well as story unlockables 
and other narrative benefits. With this mod, players hit 
milestones through the choices they make for their char­
acters in play.
Characters have two milestones. Often, one is shared by 
the entire group, while the other is chosen personally. The 
personal milestone might be built into your archetype, 
suggested with a distinction, or be developed for your 
specific character. 
Milestones contain three different levels:
•	 A 1 XP level that can be hit as many times as
it applies (or once per test or contest).
•	 A 3 XP level that can only be hit once per scene.
•	 A 10 XP level that can only be hit once per 
session. If it’s a shared milestone among the party, 
once this milestone is hit, it’s unusable until the 
next session. If it’s a personal milestone, it closes 
that milestone completely, and the player should 
choose a new one at the end of the session.
Milestones are usually hit by the players’ tests or contests, 
with the GM verifying if there’s any question whether one 
has been hit or not.
The following is an example of a group milestone for a 
game based heavily on classic heroic fantasy:
HEROIC ADVENTURERS MILESTONE
You’re out there for the thrills and the fame, but mostly for 
the thrills. If there are monsters to vanquish and people in 
need of adventurers, your troupe is there! 
•	 1 XP when your party defeats an adversary.
•	 3 XP when you emerge successfully from
a battle or conflict.
•	 10 XP when you complete or abandon
a major quest.
However, if you’re running a game where fighting is 
downplayed, you might change the focus of the milestone 
to match your game’s theme. Here’s an example:
DUNGEON DELVER MILESTONE
You heed the call of all the riches found in lost ruins, forgot­
ten tombs, and strange abandoned temples. Finding the 
dungeon is half the fun; clearing it is where it’s at!
•	 1 XP when you find new treasure.
•	 3 XP when you explore a new area.
•	 10 XP when you finish exploring a complete 
dungeon or abandon a dungeon because it’s
too dangerous.
NOÉ LEYVA


=== PAGE 89 ===
CHAPTER 2 PRIME CHARACTERS 85
SESSION MILESTONES
GMs can offer milestones at the start of a session or reveal 
them after major turning points in the session’s ongoing 
narrative. Session milestones tie the PCs directly into 
the story, giving them personal motivations (and XP!)
for becoming involved. 
As you have two milestones, you can replace your current 
personal milestone with the session milestone, or if the 
GM allows, replace the group milestone until the session 
milestone is completed. 
An example session milestone might be:
RESCUE THE PRINCE OF FLOWERS
My son the prince has been abducted by the Bandit Queen! 
I won’t stand for this affront to our family! Save him before 
it’s too late.
•	 1 XP when you ask somebody you just met
about the Prince of Flowers.
•	 3 XP when you get a clue towards the
Prince’s location.
•	 10 XP when you rescue the Prince or decide
to leave him with the Bandit Queen.
UNLOCKABLES
XP may be spent between scenes to increase a PC’s traits 
or unlock other benefits. You may spend as much XP as 
you’ve earned to unlock multiple upgrades at once. 
The GM may create unlockables that provide greater 
access to story elements such as important GMCs, previ­
ously unavailable locations, or property. Sometimes an 
unlockable represents a one-shot benefit that’s significant 
enough to warrant earning XP towards it; other times it 
becomes a permanent option in your repertoire.
Tailor the following menu of options to the specific traits 
and mods you’re using for your game. This list can also 
be customized and adapted for games that eschew mile­
stones but feature the GM handing out XP directly each 
session for such things as entertaining roleplaying or 
achieving story goals.
•	 Train a new specialty at Expert ⑧.
•	 Unlock an SFX.
•	 Add a ⑥ signature asset.
•	 Upgrade an existing trait from ⑥ to ⑧.
•	 Upgrade an existing Expert ⑧ specialty
to Master ⑩.
•	 Add a ⑩ signature asset.
•	 Upgrade an existing trait from ⑩ to ⑫.
CAROL AZEVEDO
5 XP:
15 XP:
20 XP:
10 XP:
•	 Add a ⑧ signature asset.
•	 Add a new locked SFX to a distinction
or signature asset.
•	 Upgrade an existing trait from ⑧ to ⑩.
•	 Upgrade an existing Master ⑩ specialty
to Grandmaster ⑫.
•	 Add a ⑫ signature asset.


=== PAGE 90 ===
KEVIN HONG
