
=== PAGE 91 ===
87
CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
CHAPTER BREAKDOWN
This chapter covers a number of topics relating to the 
management of scenes. 
What Are Scenes? This section explains what scenes and beats 
are, as well as the six standard types of scenes.
Running Scenes: This section includes how to frame a scene and 
how to end it, as well as how to run different types of scenes and 
which game mechanics are used to do so.
What Is Conflict? The remainder of the chapter breaks down
the use of conflict in scenes, specifically how to manage the 
action order and use tricks like timed tests and scale
differences to spice up a scene.
Every session of play is broken down into scenes that involve characters trying to resolve 
the challenges and obstacles in their path toward success, victory, or character growth. 
This chapter looks at scenes and explains the different sorts of scenes characters might 
be involved in, and what goes into each scene from a rules point of view.
PRIME
SCENES
CHAPTER 3


=== PAGE 92 ===
88 CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
A scene in Cortex Prime is much like a scene in a movie, a 
novel, or a play: a unit of story in which characters interact 
with each other and the setting. Scenes are always framed 
by the GM, which means the GM describes where the 
scene takes place, which of the PCs is there, and what is 
going on. We encourage the GM to ask the players leading 
questions to give them an opportunity to explain why 
their PC is present, what they’re doing, and so forth. A 
scene doesn’t need to involve the dice until the back and 
forth—the GM presenting the situation and the players 
saying what they’re doing—comes to a point of conflict 
or decision.
Breaking a session into scenes allows the GM to skip past 
otherwise uninteresting periods of time or storyline and 
get right to a charged situation, a set of circumstances 
that might reveal interesting developments. Traveling 
by train from Chicago to Minneapolis isn’t a scene, but 
the group chatting over bad dining car food right as the 
bridge ahead gets blown up by explosives is a scene.
A scene ends when the primary objective or situation 
of the scene is resolved. There’s no need to wrap up the 
scene beyond its logical ending point or let conversations 
between the characters continue to ramble. The GM can 
just call “Scene!” or something like that, and go immedi­
ately to “Okay, three hours later…”
Scenes can be further broken down into beats, which is 
how we track all of the things that happen in a scene.
WHAT ARE BEATS?
A beat is the smallest dramatic unit of the story. If two PCs 
try to crack a bank vault’s door, that’s a beat. If a PC guides 
a boat through a harbor filled with mines, that’s a beat. If 
a PC hides in a closet while a creature stalks through the 
house, that’s a beat. If a PC spends hours online research­
ing a corrupt mining conglomerate, that’s a beat. The trick 
is that it doesn’t matter how long or short the activity is, 
but how simple it is.
A PC may spend all night pulling out the guts of a pickup 
truck’s engine, but it’s one beat because it can be boiled 
down to “My PC fixes the pickup truck’s engine.” In 
contrast, within the span of thirty seconds, another PC 
somersaults through an open window, takes a wild shot 
at a security guard, shoots out the tires on the security 
guard’s nearby car, and jumps onto the back of a delivery 
truck that’s taking off—four separate beats.
There’s no fixed number of beats in a scene; they’re just a 
convenient use of time within which you can frame some­
thing that a player character tries to do—a test. Thinking 
in terms of beats should give you a gut sense of the tests a 
player needs to make to do what they want to do.
A PC makes a test to somersault through the open window 
(success), then takes one to shoot at the guard (failure), 
one to shoot the tires (success), and one to jump onto the 
truck (success).
WHAT ARE SCENES?
REZA AFSHAR


=== PAGE 93 ===
89
CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
TYPES OF SCENES
Cortex Prime divides scenes into different types 
that serve specific functions. This may be useful 
in pacing out sessions and giving certain char­
acters more opportunities for using their skills 
and abilities with some regularity.
OPENING SCENES
Opening scenes, also known as establishment 
scenes, are designed purely to set up the core 
problem or situation of any given session. They 
set up what the characters are doing when the 
session starts, establishes where they are, who 
they’re with, and what they’ve been doing since 
the previous session. You can manage bookkeep­
ing in opening scenes, introduce or foreshadow 
characters and ideas you plan to confront the 
players with later, and so forth.
ACTION SCENES
Action scenes involve high stakes, cinematic action, and 
opposing forces in combat or challenge. They typically 
feature tests and contests, or might use the action order 
(page 98) to manage beats. Action scenes often make up 
the bulk of the scenes in a session.
BRIDGE SCENES
Bridge scenes, also called transition scenes, represent 
downtime between action scenes. In some games, they 
might be the only scenes in which PCs can create, recover, 
or upgrade assets and eliminate or recover complications 
without high difficulty. Use bridge scenes when the PCs 
are regrouping, checking in on contacts or extras, or 
making plans.
EXPLORATION SCENES
Exploration scenes—a variation on bridge scenes—are 
often reduced to montages or red travel lines drawn across 
maps. They may feature tests against the environment or 
even traps and puzzles, but the focus is less on action and 
more on getting from one place to another, finding the 
way to the next action scene. They’re similar to bridge 
scenes in that they link action scenes, but they can serve 
the specific purpose of passing time without simply hand 
waving the experience.
FLASHBACK SCENES
A flashback scene is often used in tandem with a callback 
(page 82), but not necessarily. Flashback scenes serve the 
primary purpose of establishing an asset or relationship 
and filling in some backstory that the GM or players want 
to bring up in the current scene. A flashback scene can 
interrupt another type of scene, but it shouldn’t be drawn 
out, since flashback scenes often involve only one or two 
PCs and the GM.
TAG SCENES
A tag scene is the last scene in any session and represents 
the “here’s what we learned” scenes between characters. 
This type of scene is important in a game that uses growth 
and trait statements to represent advancement; players 
can roleplay that growth in tag scenes.
A tag scene is short, summarizes or ties up loose ends, and 
each character may be in several tag scenes at the end of 
a session depending on how many important characters 
(PCs or GMCs) they might be tangled up with.
NATALIA BACETTI


=== PAGE 94 ===
90 CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
RUNNING 
SCENES
The primary goal for the GM in any scene is to set 
it up (frame it) and then see what happens. Often, 
the GM has no idea what the end of the scene will 
look like, so there’s as much of a sense of discov­
ery in framing scenes as there is in playing them.
FRAMING THE SCENE
As the GM, one of your primary responsibilities is setting 
up each scene or framing the scene, to use cinema lingo. 
Of all of your tools, this one places the most authority on 
you. It’s a powerful thing, because it means you get to 
decide the most basic things about the scene: where it 
is, who’s there, what’s going on, why it’s happening, and 
when all of this takes place. You’re painting a mental 
picture for the players, getting them ready to jump right 
into the story again. You can add distinctions to the 
scene that any PC or GMC can use, complete with SFX. 
You can also add predefined assets or complications. See 
“Locations as GMCs” on page 116 for more.
Once you’ve framed the scene, this authority shifts back 
toward the players and the game’s rules; players tell you 
what they want to do, the rules help you figure out what 
dice are required if any, and everyone gets to see what 
happens. Sometimes, the scene is only a couple of beats 
and it’s done—other times, it can take up a good part of 
the session! 
WHERE AND WHEN IS IT?
First decide where the scene takes place. Is it a location 
familiar to the players? That’s easy, you won’t need to 
go into too much detail. Is this somewhere new? Take a 
moment to set the stage: give the players a quick rundown 
of the location and what’s there. Then let the players know 
how long after the last scene this is—is it later in the day? 
The next day? A week? If a scene happens immediately 
after another one, make sure you communicate this right 
up front.
Don’t spend a lot of time providing them with an inven­
tory of the location’s contents, but do try to engage at least 
two senses, like sight and touch, smell and sound. If you 
can hit the main elements of a scene, like “It’s a smoky 
bar in a shady part of town, not too far from the river; the 
ceiling’s covered in years of soot and the furniture’s seen 
better days,” then you’ve given the players plenty to go on.
Similarly, you don’t have to tell the players everything 
that’s happened in the time between this new scene and 
the last. If it’s been a week since a big fight that the players 
were involved in and you’re not worrying about a bridge 
scene, then you can just say “It’s been a week of fruitless 
searching for the mercenary who escaped you, but you 
think you’ve got a lead.” Tell them what time of day it is, 
since that can make a big difference.
Sometimes it’s okay to let the players take the lead when 
it comes to the where and when. If the players tell you, 
“We’re going to go downtown to the club later that night 
and see if the gang boss is there,” then that’s a good reason 
to set the scene at the club and at night. On the other 
hand, you don’t have to abide by that if you don’t want to. 
You can even redirect that with something like: “The club 
doesn’t seem to be crowded, and the gang boss is nowhere 
to be seen. On the way back from the club, however…”
WHO’S THERE?
The GM gets to say who’s in a scene and who isn’t, and that 
includes which PCs start out in the scene and which ones 
don’t. Sometimes a scene is just between two of the PCs 
and a GMC contact of theirs, and other times the whole 
group is present. You can take a hint from the players if 
they seem really interested in splitting up and going in 
two different directions—frame a scene with one of the 
two groups, and then move to another scene with the rest 
of them after you’re done with the first one.
You absolutely do not need to put all of the PCs together in 
every scene. Sometimes the scene only needs a couple of 
them, for instance if three characters meet up at a restau­
rant to share information. Other times, the scene might 
only have one PC in it to start with.


=== PAGE 95 ===
WHAT’S HAPPENING?
The final element of scene framing is setting up what’s 
actually going on in the scene when it starts. You want 
to convey a sense of action so the scene is alive from the 
beginning; you can do this by setting things in motion—
trees have the wind in their branches, crowds of people 
are moving along the street, rain is bouncing off the 
tin roof, and so on. You’re establishing the mood of the 
scene with a couple of details, and that helps the players 
complete that mental picture.
You also want to figure out what’s happening with the 
players as the scene starts. It’s one thing to tell them they 
emerge from the tunnel into a treasure vault filled with 
coins and gems. It’s quite another thing to describe them 
tumbling in from the chute above, arguing with each 
other about who pulled the lever that dumped them here.
Remember, the players will take their cues from you. If 
you describe things as static it can take a lot for them to 
get things moving. If you start things in motion, even just 
a little, you’re setting up a scene that encourages activity.
Even a bridge scene intended to be a period of recovery 
and reflection can be framed as part of a living, breath­
ing world, rather than a snapshot. Don’t be afraid to use 
GMCs and other incidental characters or creatures to 
make it alive, regardless of whether or not the PCs are 
going to do something.
SCENE FRAMING TRICKS
It’s easy to fall into a comfortable but repetitive pattern 
with scene framing. These techniques, drawn from liter­
ary and cinematic screenwriting, help you start scenes off 
with some variety and shake things up a little.
“WHY ARE YOU HERE?”
Sometimes you’ve got an idea to put a character some­
where and you’re not actually sure why they’re there. You 
might just need a character to be somewhere because it’s 
about time for them to confront the big bad of the session, 
or you want to introduce a couple of new GMCs but you 
haven’t nailed down why the group is at this particular 
meeting place. Some GMs have the impulse to ask the 
players if their characters would be there or not. But if 
you give them a yes or no question, the answer might be 
“no” and you’re left with an empty scene.
Instead of if, ask the player why their character is there. 
Put it on them to suggest a reason, a motivation, or a 
goal based on their character’s traits. Players know their 
characters better than you do; by presenting a question 
of “why?” rather than “would you?” you invite them 
to fill in the gaps with something that makes sense for
their character.
Sometimes I might ask a player not only why they’re there, 
but why another character is with them. This encourages 
players to set up fun rivalries or partnerships that they 
might not pursue otherwise. “Why is your knight here 
arguing with Amelie’s knight?” for example. Or, “Why did 
your police detective tell Amelie’s medical examiner to 
meet you at the docks?”
ALEXANDRA MIMS COOK


=== PAGE 96 ===
92 CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
WHEN TO END THE SCENE
Just as the GM frames the scene, it’s the GM’s job to end it. 
Cortex Prime works best when scenes are short, punchy, 
get things done, and cut away to move onto another scene 
before they become long, dragged-out affairs with char­
acters sitting around waiting for more things to happen. 
Here’s a few guidelines about how to determine if your 
scene has hit the ending point.
ALWAYS LEAVE THEM WANTING MORE
It might seem like you should resolve everything before 
the end of a scene, but the best writers know that keeping 
some questions unanswered keeps people interested in 
what will happen next. If a problem surfaces during a 
scene, it might not be resolved until another scene comes 
around. It’s important that the status quo changes during 
a scene—otherwise the game feels static—but you can 
extend major developments over a number of scenes 
(and with a number of different characters and locations) 
before you finally tie the knot in it.
CUT BEFORE THE SECOND LULL
It’s natural for some scenes to start out all storm and 
thunder but slow down somewhere in the middle as the 
players figure out what’s happened, make some decisions, 
and contemplate their next moves before the action picks 
right back up again. The trick is to end the scene before 
this happens twice. Let players charge back in after a 
mid-scene pivot, and then cut away before you lose any of
that momentum.
IMPASSE
Sometimes there’s a clear point at which two opponents 
are trading blows, barbs, or bluster back and forth in a 
contest for several rolls but nothing meaningful seems 
to be happening. You’ve reached an impasse, and this 
drops the mood as other players, eager to jump back into 
the game, have to deal with the repetition of it all.
FRAMING AFTER ARRIVAL
Frequently a scene starts with the PCs showing up some­
where, especially when you’re following the natural 
progression of the last scene’s activity. If the players all 
decide that their characters are heading off to the herbal­
ist to find a rare herb that’s needed for a ritual, you don’t 
need to start the next scene with the PCs showing up at 
that herbalist’s shop. Instead, you can skip ahead, explain 
that they were there and found the herb without much 
trouble, and frame the scene with them leaving the shop. 
Then, you surprise the players with an ambush of assas­
sins sent from an enemy who wants to keep them from 
performing the ritual, since that’s the scene you want to 
play out.
It’s fine to move things along in this way even if you’d 
otherwise be calling for a test for the thing that you’re 
skipping over. Sometimes that sort of test won’t really 
give you anything interesting anyway, and it’s more inter­
esting to assume the PCs are successful and get to the
juicy stuff.
IN MEDIAS RES
One of my favorite tricks is to start a scene in medias res, 
which means “in the middle of things.” With this trick, the 
scene opens with the action already in progress. Describe 
the PCs standing back to back, dozens of ninjas with their 
swords drawn around them. Or describe the carnage of 
a dozen fallen ninjas, the PCs flicking blood from their 
own blades as the ninja’s wicked master emerges from 
his sanctum.
Beginning a scene in medias res carries a few risks. Some 
players really don’t want to skip over that action because it 
assumes choices they wouldn’t have made. Others might 
want to have done something before the scene went this 
far, such as set up an ambush or scout around. As terrific 
a narrative device as this is, you should go into it with a 
clear understanding of your players’ preferences. 


=== PAGE 97 ===
ALEXANDRA MIMS COOK
93
CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
When this happens, end the scene and return to this very 
same conflict later in a new scene. You can pick the action 
right up again and start a new contest with new rolls, even 
though it’s technically continuing the last one. Unfolding 
developments in later scenes might give the conflict in the 
stalled scene more context and meaning, which could 
invigorate it from whatever state it had fallen to.
THE BUTTON
Sometimes it’s obvious when a scene is done. Somebody 
says something hilarious, somebody delivers a finishing 
blow, somebody pulls open a door and there’s a monster 
behind it. That’s your cue to push the big red button and 
end the scene, while everyone’s nodding in agreement 
and smiling. Or, for that matter, when everyone’s scream­
ing and groaning at this new story wrinkle.
HOW TO END THE SCENE
Once you know you have to cut away, you actually need to 
do it. The next scene awaits, after all—even if it’s a bridge 
scene or a flashback, you have to bring the current one to 
a close in a manner that’s appropriate to the preceding 
events. So here are some additional tricks.
FLEE!
Yes, that classic “the bad guy’s getting away!” trick. How to 
end a pitched battle where the villain is on the ropes but 
it’s just not time for them to drop the final curtain? Have 
them give the PCs the slip. Somebody important to the 
PCs is placed in immediate danger, something explodes 
in a fiery blossom of orange nearby, a wall collapses… 
These are all fine ways to give another character a means 
of escaping the scene and ending it. This goes double for 
players, too. If a player’s in dire straits, it’s not a bad idea 
to let them narrate their getaway and then smash cut from 
that scene to the next.
STARE-OFF
Remember the impasse? A scene with multiple contests 
between two characters that’s ended in a stalemate or a 
major slowdown can be ended with the two characters 
pacing back and forth, glaring at each other, ready for 
that next exchange—that you cut away from, leaving it 
as a cliffhanger.
The roleplaying between contests is a good place to end a 
scene if everyone’s ready for a change of pace. Similarly, 
that heartbeat after the smack-down of an opponent in 
a scene that involves multiple opponents is the perfect 
place to end a scene, as the remaining antagonists look 
from their fallen ally to the PCs with murder (or fear) in 
their eyes.
ON A FAILED TEST
Has a player just failed a test and you don’t know what to 
do with that outcome right away? Unsure how the char­
acter’s going to get out of this scrape? Leave the scene 
hanging and cut away to another. The players can stew 
on it a bit while you sort out the potential consequences. 
Even if you already know what will happen (because a 
good test has you thinking about the potential outcomes 
before you roll the difficulty dice) the space between a 
failure and the description of that failure is an ideal place 
to plant a cliffhanger and maintain the players’ interest.
INTERRUPTION
A good place to cut away from a scene can just involve 
somebody walking in and interrupting the flow of action. 
Heated exchange between the PCs and the judge who’s 
overseeing the case? A clerk walks in waving a folder 
with new evidence. Players despairing after unsuccess­
fully taking on a gigantic sea monster? A huge armored 
turtle rises out of the ocean to square off with the beast. 
Basically, throwing in something that interrupts the flow 
of action serves as a good way to bring a scene to an end 
without needing to immediately resolve the situation, and 
introduces something new to deal with the next time you 
frame a scene with those characters.


=== PAGE 98 ===
94 CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
RUNNING
OPENING SCENES
Your opening scenes set the stage and introduce the char­
acters to the sort of storylines you’re hoping to establish 
in the session. That’s why these are often called estab­
lishment scenes. You don’t want to soft-pedal these—it’s 
fine sometimes to start off the game by saying something 
like “So you’re all in an inn,” but it’s much better to drop 
them in medias res, setting up something that’s already 
underway, skipping over the uninteresting stuff.
What’s uninteresting stuff? That depends on your group. 
For me, I don’t usually explore the characters waking up 
in the morning, getting their kit together, setting out for 
work, catching a ride on the Metro, and so on. Instead, 
I frame an opening scene at the character’s workplace 
with a big problem having just landed on their desk, and 
asking them, “So how do you deal with this?” Opening 
scenes invite the players to start roleplaying their charac­
ters’ strengths and flaws right away, confronting anything 
that’s introduced by you as GM and setting up what they 
might be doing later in the session.
OPENING SCENE MECHANICS
An opening scene doesn’t need to involve tests and 
contests. They can just be roleplaying and questions 
asked and answered. Make the opening scenes for all 
of the players short and sweet, but give them enough to 
work with so that everyone around the table knows where 
things stand.
RUNNING
ACTION SCENES
All of the information presented earlier in this section 
applies for action scenes, which should be framed to be as 
hard and as punchy as possible. An action scene is often 
the highlight of the session for many players, one where 
they can show off a lot of their SFX and skills, and gener­
ate ●
Ⓟ or hero dice for later. The big finale of a session is 
usually an action scene, a showdown between the players 
and the antagonist they’ve been psyching themselves to 
confront all session.
ACTION SCENE MECHANICS
Action scenes are characterized by conflict, but it’s not 
always between characters. In settings like Hammerheads 
(page 150), action scenes are where the PCs engage with 
the catastrophic disasters and crises that make that 
setting notable. Thinking of action scenes as “combat 
encounters” isn’t accurate, but it’s a decent comparison 
for folks who are used to combat oriented RPGs—you 
square off against some obstacle or another, roll a bunch 
of dice, and hope to come out of the scene with a win.
See “What is Conflict?” on page 97 for more on how to 
build on conflict in action scenes.


=== PAGE 99 ===
95
CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
RUNNING
EXPLORATION SCENES
Exploration scenes often set up an action scene or a flash­
back scene, and they’re a perfect opportunity to give your 
players details and info. An exploration scene can spread 
over multiple locations, requiring one or more tests from 
the players, or you might isolate the scene to a single loca­
tion with hidden clues, knowledge, or things to discover. I 
like to use exploration scenes to feature interesting loca­
tions that the players might not otherwise discover.
EXPLORATION SCENE MECHANICS
Exploration scenes in a mystery-themed session will likely 
focus on investigation—play out the acquisition of clue-
based assets, pick up one or two complications that persist 
until later, and introduce GMCs to help you as GM explain 
one or more situations that are key to the session’s story.
You can use an exploration scene to map out a setting, 
as well. In fantasy games, these are the scenes where 
PCs delve into underground chambers, lost tombs, and 
ruined temples. In a modern setting, these scenes reveal 
locations around a city, rooms in a hidden base, or sites 
around an archaeological dig. In a science fiction setting, 
these scenes are those where the PCs analyze planetary 
features, scout out abandoned space stations, and puzzle 
out computer matrices.
RUNNING BRIDGE SCENES
Based on their name, bridge scenes might sound less 
important than action scenes, but in Cortex Prime a lot 
of the good stuff happens in the scenes where the char­
acters are recovering from their wounds, regrouping 
after a difficult encounter with an antagonist, or doing 
some important research on something that’s causing 
the group trouble that session.
If the PCs aren’t all in the same place, you can link bridge 
scenes together. Bridge scenes serve some of the same 
role as opening scenes—they’re establishing the new 
status quo, setting up the next part of the session. Some 
players need time to unwind during play, but they don’t 
want to just sit the game out. Let them roleplay with other 
characters, share information, and really get into their 
character’s heads. It’s worth it.
BRIDGE SCENE MECHANICS
These scenes use the rules for recovering from complica­
tions (page 37) and creating assets with tests (page 35). 
Bridge scenes are also excellent opportunities for PCs 
with social or personality-focused distinctions to make 
tests that might not make sense in an action scene, but 
which allow them to create assets or pick up ●
Ⓟ necessary 
for later on.
In games that use milestones for character growth, bridge 
scenes are essential. Frame a bridge scene with an eye 
toward allowing PCs to hit those milestone goals. Players 
love to get XP for roleplaying something that makes sense 
for their character and gets them into trouble.
LINDA LITHÉN


=== PAGE 100 ===
RUNNING
FLASHBACK SCENES
Flashbacks are the heart of some Cortex Prime games the 
way that action scenes are the heart of others. In a game 
that depends on heists or capers, or on mysteries and 
relationships, flashback scenes help players prepare and 
reinforce their characters without needing to frontload 
the session with such things as shopping or bookkeeping.
A flashback scene can be inspired by one player asking 
another player, “Hey, remember that time you did that 
one thing?” That’s a use of a callback if you’re using that 
sort of character growth, and it’s an opportunity for you 
to cut away from a scene that’s ongoing and frame a scene 
in the past involving the situation the players are talking 
about. I love to use flashback scenes to unpack something 
the players are otherwise just riffing on, and it gives them 
a great way to play out what really happened in the past.
FLASHBACK SCENE MECHANICS
An important use of a flashback scene is to cut from an 
action scene, play out a short scene that lets the player 
create an appropriate asset, and then cut back to the orig­
inal scene.
You can play out conflict in a flashback scene, but a simple 
test works better than a contest unless it’s important that 
the players figure out how a showdown in the past actu­
ally played out. Remember, flashbacks are history; they 
affect what happens in the “now” of the session, so they 
can’t usually change something that’s already happened 
unless it’s to reveal a twist or hidden knowledge that casts 
what’s already happened in a new light.
RUNNING
TAG SCENES
Nothing makes the end of a session more satisfying than 
playing out those last scenes that deal with where the PCs 
end up as the session wraps. It gives you the opportu­
nity to tie up loose ends that won’t carry over to the next 
session and to explore what each character thinks about 
what happened in the session.
TAG SCENE MECHANICS
A tag scene is essential for character growth that depends 
on recovering trait statements. You can use them liberally 
in other games, too, of course. Go around the table and ask 
each player what their character is doing and where they 
are—not something I recommend for framing scenes, but 
a fun thing to do when wrapping up a session. How are 
they dealing with what happened? What’s their charac­
ter’s new perspective in advance of the next session? Did 
any of their traits or other details change this session from 
milestones, growth, or earning XP?
Tag scenes are no place for contests, really. In fact, you 
might not call for any dice at all, as these scenes are 
mostly for summarizing the session, setting up the next 
session, and resolving outstanding questions. In the rare 
case that you do call for a test, make it quick and short. 
It’s not really a tag scene if it’s a pitched argument with 
another character or a fistfight. Imagine the stuff that 
happens right before the credits roll, not the stuff that 
happens right before an ad break.
ANNA “SARIANNE” 
NEUMANNOVÁ


=== PAGE 101 ===
97
CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
The degree to which conflict dominates your Cortex Prime 
game is up to you as GM and your players. You can manage 
any kind of struggle between characters and the environ­
ment or each other using the rules for tests and contests.
THREE KINDS OF CONFLICT
Some genres are more traditionally prone to extended 
battles or fights than others. A game that revolves around 
interpersonal drama is just as conflict heavy as one that 
revolves around medieval warfare or resistance to an 
alien invasion.
HEROES VS VILLAINS
If your game is about heroic characters striving against 
wicked villains, the typical conflict might be a series of 
scenes in which players test their traits against monsters, 
minions, and mooks in the form of minor GMCs and 
extras. A major GMC—such as a warlord or mastermind—
serves as the climactic contest, one that might shift from 
location to location, with a chase in between.
It’s crucial to use an action order (page 98) for larger 
set-piece scenes with multiple antagonists and every 
PC doing something different, sharing a spotlight. Use 
contests occasionally for one-on-one duels.
INTERPERSONAL DRAMA
If your game is about a cast of PCs who may work toward 
conflicting or opposing goals, even if they’re not aggres­
sive or violent in nature, most scenes are contests. In 
between these scenes, players might test their traits 
against GMCs or difficult circumstances, often to estab­
lish their own storylines. The group doesn’t have to get 
along. In fact, when emulating television dramas, the PCs 
don’t even like each other all the time, let alone want to 
spend time with one another or work toward a single goal.
Don’t use action order unless necessary. Instead, estab­
lish who is the dramatic lead and play out contests using 
a dramatic order (page 98). Use the rules for interfering 
liberally (page 23). Contests form the bulk of player vs 
player drama.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONFLICT
If your game is an exploration or investigation game, 
including those with a “sandbox” setting (where the 
players decide where to go within an open setting filled 
with story hooks) or one that plays out through a mystery, 
most of the conflict is the players testing their traits 
against the environment or an abstract difficulty.
From time to time, threats such as monsters or henchmen 
or supernatural phenomena show up as tests. Contests are 
much less likely but may be used to represent extended 
chases. Timed tests are common.
Action order (page 98) comes into play when there are 
fights with threatening elements, but the pacing of each 
scene is freeform and organic.
WHAT IS
CONFLICT?
STEPH C.


=== PAGE 102 ===
98 CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
DRAMATIC ORDER
If the primary focus of your session is intense conflict 
between characters, or it plays out over longer periods 
of time between scenes, dramatic order is your default. 
In dramatic order the decision about who goes first is 
determined by a character, usually a player, stating that 
they want something and another character, sometimes 
a player but often the GM, saying they want to stop them. 
The initiating character is called the dramatic lead.
Play carries on as normal with the dramatic lead starting 
the contest by rolling dice and their opposition trying to 
roll higher, just as with the standard rules for contests. 
Once these contests are resolved they can either transi­
tion to another contest shortly afterward, with or without 
a change in location or circumstances, determined by the 
first contest’s outcome.
Adam declares that his Hero, a special agent chasing 
down a terrorist, is going to confront an arms 
dealer in a border town and shake them down for 
information. The dealer, Ronnie, in this case a GMC 
played by Mary Rose as the GM, doesn’t want to get 
on the terrorist’s bad side, and thus a contest arises 
with the Hero as the dramatic lead. Adam wins the 
contest, and a ⑩ complication is imposed on Ronnie 
to bring pressure against him to spill the beans.
When there are multiple players active in the same scene 
and one player starts a contest, the other players can try to 
aid the dramatic lead, interfere with the contest (because 
they want something else from the scene), or wait to see 
what happens.
If everyone wants to go first and it’s not clear who would, 
you can call for all the players who want to start the 
dramatic order to roll their dice for the contests they want 
to start. The highest rolling player starts and uses that 
roll for the contest; the other players pick up their dice 
and can interfere, assist, or sit out the contest as it plays 
out. Move on to other contests as appropriate, varying the 
dramatic lead when possible.
Mary Rose shifts attention to Tina. Her Sage,
another agent, is now the dramatic lead. She uses
the previous complication as leverage to force 
Ronnie to give them access to the terrorist cell’s 
website. Mary Rose rolls an opportunity, so Tina 
spends a ●
Ⓟ to step up the existing complication
to ⑫, and when she wins the contest with Adam’s 
help, Ronnie is taken out. He hands over the 
passwords to Tina’s Sage.
ACTION ORDER
If the order in which things happen in a scene matters, 
it’s often a good idea to shift conversational back and 
forth between players and GM with the occasional test or 
contest to an action order. This is especially true of fight 
scenes or moments when there’s chaos and confusion and 
it becomes important to know who goes first and when.
Other names for action order include handoff initiative 
and elective order.
ACTIONS AND REACTIONS
When using an action order to track conflict, tests and 
contests are replaced with actions and reactions. An 
action is like the initiating roll of a contest; a reaction 
is a defensive or reactive roll to avoid it and only defen­
sive traits apply. The character whose turn it is chooses 
which character they target with their action. If there is 
no opposing character, use difficulty dice as the reaction. 
For more detail, see Action-Based Resolution on page 24.
WHO GOES FIRST
The GM decides who goes first in the action order based 
on a snapshot of the scene at that moment. Often it’s a PC 
who starts a fight, shouts something insulting, or bursts 
in on a room full of unpleasant people. If a GMC has the 
drop on the group, then they go first in the action order. 
The character who goes first is the action lead.
All characters—player and GM—get a turn. Play progresses 
around the table, starting with the first to act, and then 
that player chooses the next character—either a PC or a 
GMC—to act. Once everyone has had a chance to do some­
thing, the last one to go chooses the action lead for the 
next round (this could include nominating themselves).
HOW IT ENDS
As the GM, you can drop the game out of action order at 
any time. If it’s a fight and one side scores a decisive win, 
then the action order is obviously over and play carries 
on as it did before, with a shared spoken narrative. Or it’s 
possible that nothing interesting can happen any longer 
and so the scene ends, and with it the action order.
TRACKING ACTION ORDER
Using turn markers to clearly show when a player or GMC 
has taken their turn in the action order is highly recom­
mended. A turn marker can be something as simple as 
a two-sided card, with one side showing green and the 
other red, or a painted miniature of a character where 
it’s standing up if the character hasn’t acted yet and lying 
down if they have. 


=== PAGE 103 ===
99
CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
TAKING INITIATIVE
This mod calls back to roleplaying games where the order 
in which characters act is determined by a die roll or some 
other mechanic at the beginning of the fight. The order 
proceeds from the highest rolling total to the lowest, 
and then either starts over again at the top of the next 
sequence and repeats, or there’s another die roll to estab­
lish the order again.
There are several ways to determine who takes initiative 
using this mod. They include:
•	 Each side in a conflict chooses a leader, who 
assembles a dice pool appropriate to the situation 
(usually one that includes traits reflecting tactical 
or strategic know-how) and rolls. The side with 
the highest total chooses one of its group to go 
first, then the next highest rolling side chooses 
one of theirs, and so on.
•	 Everyone in the conflict rolls dice for 
themselves, and characters make tests or 
contests in order from highest rolling total
to lowest.
•	 Each character has a fixed initiative rating 
based on the highest possible total of two traits 
(such as Physical + Mental) and everyone acts
in order of that rating.
•	 Each character has a fixed initiative rating 
but rolls a die such as a ⑥, or perhaps a ⑧
if they can justify a distinction that’s appropriate, 
or a ④ if they can justify a distinction that’s 
a hindrance. Add the die to an initiative rating 
derived from two traits and then act in that order. 
Any hitches rolled do not add to the initiative 
rating, as usual, and can be activated by the GM 
once initiative order is settled.
ADVANTAGE OF SCALE
In some cases, a conflict might take place between two 
groups of radically different sizes, scale, or degrees of 
power. An example might be a lone PC taking on some­
body in an armored car, or a fighter jet taking on an enemy 
aircraft carrier. As GM, you may adjudicate a simple scale 
advantage as being outright impossible (human being 
tries to punch spaceship) or with a scale die, which is 
a bonus ⑧ added to whichever side has the advantage. 
Along with a scale die, that side also adds an extra die 
result into their total for free (the equivalent of spending 
a ●
Ⓟ on their total). This additional die represents a pretty 
profound advantage.
You could decide to go with a ⑧ ⑧ scale and keep two 
additional dice for the total, but this is an overwhelming 
advantage. Usually it’s best to make a ruling and move on 
(“The armored car’s machine gun sprays a hail of bullets, 
you’re a mess and need an ambulance.”).
As a rule of thumb, when the mismatch is so unfair that 
it would never work for a normal person, but a PC might 
be able to pull it off, that’s the cue to go to the extra dice. 
Players can earn a scale die if they vastly outnumber or 
outgun their opponents, but usually such odds cause 
GMC opposition to simply surrender.
CLASSIC CONVERSION NOTE
Classic Cortex games used this initiative system. They included SFX 
that altered initiative rolls to represent those who were especially 
combat-ready or combat-inept. You can duplicate that using talents 
or distinction SFX that allow players to add a die to their initiative score 
or somehow penalize their score by only allowing them to use a single 
trait instead of two. You can make these persistent SFX or require a 
 
to activate them or, in the case of the combat-inept characters, allow 
them to earn a 
 if they choose to act last.
ANTHONY
“ROBOTPENCIL”
JONES


=== PAGE 104 ===
100 CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
MULTI-LEVEL SCALE
Using this mod, the scale die may be any size from ④ to 
⑫, each step representing an increasingly larger target. 
You can choose to split the scale die up into smaller dice: a 
⑫ can become ⑩ ⑩ or ⑧ ⑧ ⑧ or ⑥⑥⑥⑥. The larger 
scale side still only keeps one additional die into their 
total, rather than an additional die for each additional 
scale die.
Mary Rose is using multi-level scale for a giant mecha 
game she’s running, as well as action order and 
actions instead of tests and contests. Heavy mechs 
have a ⑩ scale, while medium mechs have a ⑧ and 
light mechs have a ⑥. Adam’s Hero pilots a medium 
mech with a ⑧ scale, so when he assembles his dice 
pool for an attack action against a light GMC mech 
target, he can add either a ⑧ or a ⑥⑥ to his 
pool and may keep an additional die when adding up 
his total. If the GMC mech was also a medium scale 
mech, he wouldn’t include an extra die. If the GMC 
mech was a heavy mech, Mary Rose would keep an 
additional die in her reaction total.
If the player beats the difficulty by 5 or more with a heroic 
success, they can either step up their effect die to take out 
a single supporting die or they can keep two effect dice 
and try to knock out two supporting GMC dice of smaller 
size. Once the PC gets down to a single opponent, though, 
no more dice get knocked off.
Amanda’s Engineer is taking on a rival workshop in 
Steam City’s annual kitbash contest, all by herself. 
The rivals consist of a Workshop Boss ⑩ and 
three Roustabouts ⑥ who are helping their boss. 
Mary Rose plays this out with a simple test, using 
the Workshop Boss ⑩ plus ⑥⑥⑥ from the 
Roustabouts as an opposition pool. The rivals set a 
difficulty of 10, which Amanda beats easily with a 15 
on her own dice. As that’s a heroic success, Amanda 
looks at her remaining dice, which are ⑧ ⑧ and ⑥. 
Her best option is to use her heroic success to pick 
⑧ ⑧ as effect dice, using them to knock away two 
of the Roustabout ⑥ dice from the rival’s team. 
This leaves them with a ⑩ and a ⑥ for the next 
round. If she’d had a ⑩ available to her, she could 
have picked that and used the heroic success to step 
it up to ⑫, taking out the Workshop Boss ⑩.
ADAM’S OPPONENT
RESULT
Light Mech 
Adam can add 
 
 or 
 
 to his dice 
pool and keep 3 results for his action.
Medium Mech 
Adam gets no advantage.
Heavy Mech 
Mary Rose can add 
 or 
 
 to her 
dice pool and keep 3 dice results for 
her reaction.
GANGING UP
GMCs, especially antagonistic ones, often gang up in 
large numbers because they think that’s going to help. 
Sadly, they’ve never heard of the inverse ninja rule, which 
states that the more bad guys there are, the weaker they 
are individually. If they keep doing it, here’s how you 
handle it.
Each additional opponent adds a single die to the oppo­
sition’s dice pool equal to the highest trait they could use 
in the fight. This doesn’t change the number of dice added 
together to set or beat the difficulty (it’s still two), just the 
number of dice rolled. The most common example of this 
is a gang of six Thugs ⑥ which amounts to a roll of 6x ⑥ 
(first thug is ⑥, each additional thug adds another ⑥, 
so it’s 6x ⑥). This is formalized in some games as a mob 
GMC (see page 117 for more information).
Every time a player beats the difficulty against a side that 
has multiple assisting characters, they compare their 
effect die to the supporting dice and knock away a single 
supporting die that’s smaller than their effect die. This 
represents whittling away the opposition, one ugly mug 
at a time.
GETTING HELP FROM OTHERS
A group of PCs can gang up like a horde of mooks can, 
handing over a single die of the appropriate type to the 
player whose character is leading the charge. The risk is 
that if the opponent beats the difficulty, they could use 
the effect die to take out a helping player’s die (much like 
with Ganging Up, above), and the helping PC is taken out 
as if they had lost the fight. You can always choose to drop 
out before the dice are rolled again. You can also spend a 
●
Ⓟ to take a complication instead of being taken out, but 
regardless you can’t keep helping the primary PC.
Another way to aid a PC is to use your turn to make a 
test and create an asset to hand over to the PC (page 
35). This eliminates the chance that your character gets
taken out, but it can take some organizing and has a 
chance of failure.
CHARACTER
DICE RESULTS
TOTALS
Workshop Boss 
3x Roustabout 
10
Engineer
15
Roustabout
Effect Die 1
Effect Die 2
Roustabout
Roustabout


=== PAGE 105 ===
TIMED TESTS
Quite often the real challenge comes not from whether a 
PC can succeed at a task, but whether they can succeed 
at it fast enough. Timed tests work well for characters like 
the technician, pilot, or medic when the other members of 
the group are off doing something like shooting bad guys.
A timed test is a special kind of test that handles situa­
tions where there’s a clock counting down or a limited 
window in which to carry out a task. Timed tests use a 
series of standard tests, either several of the same kind 
(Mental + Fix, for instance) or a series of different tests 
for something that has multiple steps (such as Physical 
+ Sneak, then Mental + Focus, then Social + Influence).
The time’s measured in beats—the more beats, the longer 
you have. Each time a player rolls the dice, it uses one 
beat. Use checkboxes or tokens to keep track of beats. It’s a 
countdown, because there’s a finite amount of time; once 
that’s gone, they’re done. 
As the GM, you set the difficulty for the tests and decide 
how much time they have. By default, the number of beats 
is the number of tests—three or four is a good baseline. 
For an easier timed test, give them one or two additional 
beats to accomplish it. For a harder test, give them one or 
even two fewer beats.
•	 If you beat the difficulty, it only costs you the time 
you spent, i.e., one beat. A heroic success means 
you found a shortcut and don’t lose any time at 
all. You don’t lose a beat for that roll.
•	 If you fail to beat the difficulty, you succeeded 
but that part of the test took too long, and an 
additional beat is lost. Move on to the next stage 
of the timed test.
LENKA ŠIMEČKOVÁ
PLAYER’S TOTAL
DIFFICULTY
COST
12
10
one beat
15
10
none
9
10
2 beats


=== PAGE 106 ===
102 CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
Tina is playing her Sage in one of Mary Rose’s near-
future superhero games. Mary Rose has just framed 
a scene in which the Sage, who is a highly skilled 
mind-scanning telepath and secret agent, arrives at a 
crowded social function that’s lousy with wealthy city 
officials, politicians, and celebrities. She tells Tina that 
her Sage’s contacts revealed that her nemesis, the 
Crow, has planted hired killers in the crowd, and the 
Sage only has minutes to locate them telepathically 
and stop them from staging a deadly attack.
This is a timed test, using the Sage’s Mental ⑩ 
+ Focus ⑧ + Telepathic Agent distinction and 
Telepathy ⑧ power die. Mary Rose sets the 
difficulty at ⑧ ⑧ and puts three poker chips on the 
table to act as the beat countdown. She says that 
each roll costs a beat, and requires three successes, 
one for each killer. If she pulls off all three and uses 
up all three beats, she’s stopped the attack just in the 
nick of time. Every killer she doesn’t manage to track 
down leads to progressively more carnage!
Mary Rose sets the difficulty on the first roll: it’s 10 
(8 + 2 on the ⑧ ⑧). Tina rolls her dice pool and 
gets 7, 6, 2, and 2. The 7 and 6 give her a total of 13, 
which is enough to identify one killer. This costs her 
one beat, and Mary Rose removes one poker chip.
Two more to go!
On the next roll, the difficulty is 8 (6 + 2 on the 
⑧ ⑧). Tina spends a ●
Ⓟ to create a ⑥ asset 
for her roll; the second killer saw the first one get 
seized by Tina’s task force, and his mind is loud with 
alarm. Tina rolls: 10, 5, 4, 2, and 2. That’s 15, a heroic 
success that doesn’t use up any beats.
Two killers are down.
Finally, Mary Rose rolls a 7 (5 + 2). Tina’s Sage scans 
the room for the last killer, with a die roll of 5, 4, 1, 
and 1. Two hitches, one on the ⑩ and the other on 
a ⑧! Luckily, the 5 and 4 give her a 9 total, so she 
locates the final killer, but in the process Mary Rose 
says that her telepathic probe goes too far into the 
killer’s violent mind.
Handing over a ●
Ⓟ to activate the hitches, Mary 
Rose gives Tina’s Sage a Overloaded Psyche ⑧ 
complication (⑥ from one hitch, stepped up by one 
for the second). The Sage saved the day with one 
beat to spare, but might not be in the best mental 
state to deal with the fallout when the Crow arrives 
at the gala…
PLAYER
DICE RESULTS
TOTALS
Mary Rose
10
Tina
13
Tina’s total beats Mary Rose’s and the Sage locates
the first killer.
Physical
Mental
Social
THE SAGE
Knowledge is the only
weapon I need.
⑧ Focus
⑧ Telepathy
Telepathic agent ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
DIFFICULTY
TINA’S DICE POOL
⑧ ⑧
Mental ⑩, Focus ⑧,
Telepathy ⑧, Telepathic Agent ⑧
FIRST KILLER
SECOND KILLER
THIRD KILLER
Killers Left
Beats Left
Killers Left
Beats Left
PLAYER
DICE RESULTS
TOTALS
Mary Rose
7
Tina
9
Mary Rose spends a ●
Ⓟ to add the complication of
Overloaded Psyche ⑧ (⑥ hitch stepped up by the
additional hitch). 
Killers Left
Beats Left
PLAYER
DICE RESULTS
TOTALS
Mary Rose
8
Tina
15
Tina spends a ●
Ⓟ to add a ⑥ asset to her pool. Tina’s roll
beats Mary Rose’s by more than 5 for a heroic success.
YANGTIAN LI


=== PAGE 107 ===
103
CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
COMPLETING THE TIMED TEST
When you finish with the obstacles planned for that test 
and the player succeeds with time left on the clock, they’ve 
achieved their objectives (including a clean getaway, if 
that’s what they’re looking to do). If they succeed but have 
zero beats left, they must choose between achieving their 
objective and a clean getaway (or between achieving their 
objective and saving some money or between achieving 
their objective and being proud of their work, etc.). In 
other words, if you complete the test with no more beats 
remaining, your success is conditional.
Tina’s Sage finished the job with a beat still left on the 
table. Mary Rose says this means the Sage has time 
to plan for the Crow’s arrival, as well as taking out all 
three killers. What if she’d used up all three beats? In 
that case, she’d have to make a choice: take out the 
final killer, and have no time to prepare for the Crow, 
or lose track of the killer but learn enough from the 
minds of the others that she’s ready for the Crow’s 
entrance minutes later.
BUYING TIME
If a PC is running dangerously low on time, the rest of the 
group might be able to help them out. They can make a 
test of their own—causing a diversion, trying to delay the 
bad guys with conversation, eliminating some security 
guards—and with a success, they give the player back 
one of the beats they’ve lost. If they get a heroic success, 
it’s two beats. Failure means that PC can’t help any more 
for the rest of the timed test. No matter what, only one 
attempt at buying time can happen in between each beat 
of the timed test.
Amanda’s Engineer, sitting out in the tricked-out 
surveillance van, could probably have helped Tina’s 
Sage by accessing the closed-circuit TV system that’s 
monitoring the venue. If Tina had flubbed the first 
roll, she’d definitely have called in for that kind of 
assist. Luckily for Amanda, her Engineer didn’t need 
to get involved and risk being dragged into any crisis. 
Now that the Crow is about to show up, of course, 
it’s all hands on deck. 
FAILING DOESN’T MEAN GAME OVER
Cortex Prime games frequently feature characters that are 
some of the best in the world at what they do, so failing a 
roll doesn’t always mean the character actually screwed 
up. The timed test is a pacing mechanic. It’s a given that 
the group’s hacker will break through that firewall. But 
can she do it before the enemy’s intsec agent notices? How 
many complications does she create by rolling hitches? 
Does she grab any opportunities from the GM? Those are 
the places where major twists and turns happen, not in 
failing to roll higher than the opposition’s dice.
Tina’s Sage definitely had the chops to deal with 
the crowded ballroom infiltrated by assassins, 
but the hitches she rolled at the end added flavor 
and thrills to an otherwise routine series of rolls. 
Alternatively, the Crow could have shown up and 
caused chaos early in the form of a Murder of 
Crows complication, making the scene a tempest of 
screams and fear. Or Mary Rose could have created 
two separate complications to make things
really interesting.
RUNNING OUT OF TIME
If the player runs out of beats—zero or less—they’re out 
of time, and whatever bad thing was going to happen 
happens. They might have a chance to escape, depending 
on the situation, but they can’t finish their objective. You 
should have something in mind for when this happens, 
but the player can also suggest something to the group 
and see what happens next.
What if Tina hadn’t been able to succeed at finding 
all three killers before she ran out of beats? Mary 
Rose had an actual fight with the killer lined up, if 
that happened, with the downside that somebody 
important would have been murdered before Tina’s 
Sage could get to him. This would have introduced a 
lot of drama as Tina’s agency loses some respect for 
her telepathic powers and assigns her an assistant or 
puts her on less high profile cases.


=== PAGE 108 ===
Mental
Mental
Physical
Physical
Social
104 CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
Let’s look in detail at a series of high stakes contests that make up 
the climactic battle between two characters: Count Jubatus II, a 
rocket-pack-wearing feline nobleman from a far-future space opera 
setting, and his tireless foe, Morza Sorx, a squid-headed duelist 
and bounty hunter.
MORZA SORX
Devil with a Knife ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Cruel Cut: When you first draw blood in a duel, spend a ●
Ⓟ 
to gain a Bloodmarked ⑧ asset.
Species: Hashtapamard ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Aquatic Recovery: When you are submerged in water,
spend a ●
Ⓟ to recover a complication with your Mental 
attribute die.
Hunter of the Pride ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Fear in their Eyes: When you engage in conflict with one of 
the Pride, spend a ●
Ⓟ to double your Social attribute die 
for that contest.
AN EXAMPLE 
THROWDOWN
Social
COUNT JUBATUS II
Noble of the Ådlakatter ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Noble Reputation: When you loudly announce your 
breeding in order to sway a foe, spend a ●
Ⓟ to double
your Influence for that contest.
	
ɬ Oh, Jeeves: When you engage with your fellow aristocrats, 
spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a Loyal Retainer ⑧ asset.
Species: Rymdenpanter ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Feral Fury: When you unleash your feline nature, spend a 
●
Ⓟ and double your Fight or Shoot die for that contest.
Veteran of the Pride Wars ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
SIGNATURE ASSETS
Rocket Pack 
Mother’s Blaster 
Pistol 
My Butler Magnus 
SIGNATURE ASSETS
Personal Cruiser 
Cruel Blade 
Squid Squad 
Fight
Focus
Notice
All Other Skills
Influence
Fly
SKILLS
Know
Shoot
Intimidate ⑥
Politics ⑥
Blaster ⑥
Focus
Influence
Fight
Trick
Shoot
All Other Skills
SKILLS
Cutlass ⑥
Leadership ⑥
Notice
Tracker ⑥
BETHANY BERG


=== PAGE 109 ===
105
CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
ACTIONS
A ●
Ⓟ is spent to 
double Social ⑧
MEANWHILE...
Count Jubatus II (played by Lenny), with a price 
on his head, thinks he has outrun his pursuer, 
Morza Sorx (played by Josh). However, the 
tentacle-faced bounty hunter surprises his 
quarry in the Night Bazaar on Ceti Lambda. 
Mary Rose, the GM, frames the scene: vendors 
scatter, clutching their wares and yelling as they 
trip over each other to clear a space for Jubatus 
and Morza. Ceti Lambda’s twin moons cast a 
harsh light on the market square. The stakes are 
high; only one of them can come out of this the 
winner, for surely this is the last act?
Lenny picks up his dice. “I won't let him keep this up,” he 
says. “Time to settle the score!” Jubatus bares his fangs 
and bellows a challenge at Morza, hoping to throw the 
bounty hunter off with a roar. He picks up his Social ⑧, 
Influence ⑧, a ⑥ for his Intimidate specialty, and a ⑧ 
for his Noble of the Ådlakatter distinction, and rolls. 
Lenny gets 13, with a ⑧ effect die.
MORZA (JOSH)
Dice Results
Total
15
1
2
3
JUBATUS (LENNY)
Dice Results
Total
13
Josh describes Morza spreading his arms, revealing his 
Cruel Blade underneath his greatcoat. “I’ve faced stronger 
cats than you in the Pride Wars,” the Hashtapamard says. 
Josh picks up their Social ⑧, Focus ⑥, and Hunter of 
the Pride ⑧ distinction. They also spend their ●
Ⓟ to 
activate their Fear in their Eyes SFX, doubling their Social 
die. Josh rolls and gets a 15, with a ⑧ effect die.
Lenny could give in, but decides to keep pushing. He rolls 
again, this time getting a 12, but Lenny spends his ●
Ⓟ to 
add in a third die—a 6 on his ⑥—to make the total 18. 
Once again, he keeps a ⑧ effect die. Josh knows they 
can’t beat that, with no remaining ●
Ⓟ, so they flip their 
distinction to a ④ for the last roll, picking up a ●
Ⓟ. They 
roll and get 14, which isn’t enough. Josh sets aside a ⑧ 
effect die, which means that Lenny’s roll can’t simply take 
Morza out of the scene (Lenny’s ⑧ effect die isn’t larger 
than Josh’s ⑧ effect die).
ACTIONS
A ●
Ⓟ is spent to 
add a ⑥ to
the total
ACTIONS
A ●
Ⓟ gained by 
changing a ⑧ 
into a ④
JUBATUS
Dice Results
Total
18
MORZA
Dice Results
Total
14


=== PAGE 110 ===
106 CHAPTER 3 PRIME SCENES
JUBATUS
Dice Results
Total
11
Lenny defines the resulting complication as Rattled ⑧. 
Josh accepts it, and describes Morza as taking a step 
back, squid eyes widening with astonishment. Lenny says, 
“How about Morza books it and runs?” But Josh points 
out that Morza wasn’t taken out of the scene, so Lenny 
doesn’t get to describe how Jubatus defeats Morza…yet.
Mary Rose puts it to Josh: “What does Morza do now?” 
Josh figures that, even as spooked as the bounty hunter 
is, Morza Sorx is one of the greatest duelists in the galaxy! 
So Morza draws his cutlass, the Cruel Blade, and runs at 
Jubatus, initiating a new contest.
4
5
6
7
Josh puts together the dice for their pool: Physical ⑧ +
Fight ⑩ (Cutlass ⑥ specialty) + Devil with a Knife ⑧ 
distinction plus the Cruel Blade ⑧. They roll and score 
only a disappointing 9 with a ⑧ effect die. Not a great 
initial lunge for Morza, but the duel is on.
Lenny knows Jubatus isn’t much of a fencer, but he’s
much stronger and faster than Morza. Lenny picks up
Physical ⑩ + Fight ⑧ + Veteran of the Pride Wars ⑧ 
distinction, as well as the Rattled ⑧ complication
that’s attached to Morza from the last contest. He rolls
and gets 15 with a ⑩ effect die. Jubatus ducks, weaves,
and high-kicks at Morza with a growl!
Josh retaliates, rolling the same dice pool. This time it’s 
a much better total: 16, with a ⑩ effect die. “I have you 
now,” Morza says to the Count. Josh mulls over making 
this definitive by spending their ●
Ⓟ to keep another die 
but figures 16 is good enough.
ACTIONS
⑧ added due to 
Morza’s Rattled 
complication
ACTIONS
⑩ stepped up 
to ⑫ due to the 
heroic success
ACTIONS
A ●
Ⓟ gained by 
changing a ⑧ 
into a ④
JUBATUS
Dice Results
Total
15
Lenny’s all out of ●
Ⓟ, so he decides to do the same thing 
Josh did: flip his distinction to ④, picking up a ●
Ⓟ, and 
just try to roll as well as he can. The dice hit the table…
and the best Lenny can get is an 11, with a ⑧ effect die. 
Josh’s 16 is 5 points more than Lenny’s 11, so that’s a 
heroic success, and steps up Josh’s effect die to a ⑫! 
Lenny spends his ●
Ⓟ to keep Jubatus from being taken 
out, but he takes a Wounded ⑫ complication. The tables 
have turned!
MORZA
Dice Results
Total
9
MORZA
Dice Results
Total
16


=== PAGE 111 ===
BETHANY BERG
8
9
10
With no ●
Ⓟ and a huge ⑫ complication, Lenny wonders 
if it’s time for Jubatus to get the hell out of the Night 
Bazaar. Mary Rose looks at him, and Lenny says, “The 
Count clutches his wound, and growls, ‘Another time, 
Morza!’” He picks up his Physical ⑩ + Fly ⑥ + Noble 
of the Ådlakatter ⑧ distinction + Rocket Pack ⑧ 
and the Rattled ⑧ complication from Morza. His total? 
A reasonable 12 with a ⑧ effect die…but one of his ⑧ 
came up a 1. He looks at Mary Rose, who shrugs.
“I could make that ⑫ complication get worse, but I’ll go 
easy on you.” She hands over a ●
Ⓟ for the hitch,
and creates a new complication, Running Scared ⑥.
Lenny groans. “Thanks.”
Josh thinks about how Morza will stop the Count from 
getting away. They invoke Morza’s personal gang of 
goons, the Squid Squad, describing the band of thugs 
running from out of the maze of vendors to grab at 
Jubatus. Josh picks up Social ⑧ + Influence ⑥ (plus 
⑥ for Leadership) + Hunter of the Pride ⑧ distinction 
+ Running Scared ⑥ + Wounded ⑫ + Squid Squad ⑧. 
“Seize him, my squad!” The dice fall, and the total is a 15. 
Josh spends the ●
Ⓟ they had remaining, adding a 5 from a 
⑧, for a final total of 20, and a ⑧ effect die.
“Dang squids!” curses Lenny. All he needs is to win this 
contest in order to get away. He rerolls and this time 
gets a total of 16. It’s not enough, but Lenny has a ●
Ⓟ on 
hand. He spends it to add in a 5 from a ⑥, pushing the 
total up to 21. His effect die is a ⑩. Mary Rose looks at 
Josh, noting that Morza could possibly beat 21 if they 
switched a distinction for a ④, but it’s a long shot.
JUBATUS
Dice Results
Total
12
ACTIONS
⑥ and ⑫ added 
for Lenny’s 
complications,
●
Ⓟ used to keep
an extra die
ACTIONS
A ●
Ⓟ is spent to
add a ⑥ to
the total
MORZA
Dice Results
Total
20
“This isn’t our final battle, Count!” says Josh.
They announce that they give in and collect a ●
Ⓟ from 
Mary Rose. Lenny leaves Morza and his Squid Squad in 
the dust as the Count’s rocket pack carries him off into 
the night sky of Ceti Lambda.
Mary Rose calls the end of the scene. Count Jubatus 
needs to shore up his defenses and maybe recruit some 
goons of his own… Perhaps a Loyal Retainer?
JUBATUS
Dice Results
Total
21


=== PAGE 112 ===
SABINA LEWIS
