
=== PAGE 113 ===
109
CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
CHAPTER BREAKDOWN
Here’s what to expect from this chapter.
Preparing a Session: The length of sessions, and
how much prep you need to do for them.
Game Moderator Characters: How to build a GMC
and an overview of the various types of GMCs.
Running a Session: Managing all of the elements
of a session, from setup to GMCs to the climax.
Session Tricks: Options for making a session
different from the ones before it.
This chapter is intended mostly for the game moderator (GM). It covers preparing for, 
running, and wrapping up a session of play, as well as putting together and using game 
moderator characters (GMCs). Cortex Prime is all about the sessions you play at the 
table, focusing on what most groups are able to deal with in real time—a gathering of 
a GM and players. Whether you’re playing a one-shot or a whole series, this chapter 
provides guidance to help you manage every session.
PRIME
SESSIONS
CHAPTER 4


=== PAGE 114 ===
110 CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
PREPARING
A SESSION
Before you run your first session of a Cortex Prime game, 
plan on a few hours of preparation. It’s a good idea to try 
to familiarize yourself with the contents of Prime Core, 
Prime Characters, and Prime Scenes. If you’re using a 
pre-made setting or adapting one of your favorite TV 
shows or movies to Cortex Prime, you might want to make 
some notes about what sort of game you’re interested 
in being the GM for. The players have a lot to say about 
their own characters and what sort of setting they’d like 
to explore, but it makes things a lot easier if you show up 
with an idea about what you’re prepared to run for them.
WHICH SETTING?
Some GMs pick a setting they like, spend time writing up 
detailed histories and backgrounds, create distinctions 
and powers, and maybe some archetypes. Then they put 
that in the hands of their players and use the first session 
to make characters. This is a fairly traditional method that 
works for a lot of groups.
Other GMs don’t have a preference or only have a couple 
of broad ideas about what they’d like to run, and they 
use the first session as a collaborative process with the 
players. They might suggest a steampunk setting or an 
urban fantasy drama loosely inspired by a few movies 
everyone’s seen, and then the details get fleshed out with 
a pathways map in the character creation session.
For more on settings, see the next chapter (helpfully 
named Prime Settings). You can pick one of the three 
settings included there or go with one of the more 
broadly defined genres and see where that takes you. 
More settings and worlds are available in other Cortex 
Prime books.
HOW LONG
IS A SESSION?
Sessions can be short or they can be long, and you could 
play multiple “sessions” in a single day around breaks for 
lunch or dinner. But generally, a session is about three to 
four hours of play with a beginning and an end, allow­
ing for bookkeeping, advancing a story along, and giving 
everyone enough time in the spotlight.
The central hook or story idea for any given session is 
called the situation (page 112). This isn’t the same as the 
plot, because roleplaying games aren’t pre-written stories, 
but it’s the “what” when you look back at a session and 
think, “What was that about?”
SERIES
Many groups plan to meet for several sessions, telling 
part of the same ongoing story each time. I like to think 
of sequential sessions as episodes in a television show or 
issues of a comic book. You can consider a game that takes 
place over several sessions as a series if you continue with 
the TV or comic book metaphor—there’s a story arc, but 
quite often you don’t know what the arc is until it’s been 
played out, and the “season” is over.
With a series, take a moment to recap the last session at 
the beginning of the next one, like a “previously on…” 
segment before the opening credits of a TV show. 
ONE-SHOT SESSIONS
A one-shot is an excellent way to test the waters of a new 
setting or a genre that the group hasn’t played with for a 
while (or ever) or introduce new players to Cortex Prime. 
If not everyone in your regular group can show up to an 
ongoing game, the other players might want to play a 
one-shot rather than play without that character.


=== PAGE 115 ===
111
CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
This is often a good way for the regular GM to step back 
and play a character of their own while one of the other 
players takes on the GM duties for the evening.
With one-shots, starting in medias res—in the middle 
of the action—is highly recommended as you have less 
time to build up to the situation than you might with an 
ongoing sequential game. You need to prep the session in 
advance—write up some GMCs, maybe provide pre-made 
characters, and think up a situation. As the GM, let every­
one get acquainted with their characters, make quick 
introductions, then jump straight into an action scene 
with the story already underway.
HOW MUCH PREP?
For some GMs, getting ready for a session takes as long, 
if not longer than, the session itself. For others, prepar­
ing for a session is nothing more than scribbling down 
some notes and reviewing the character files before the
game starts.
The degree to which you need to prepare for a Cortex 
Prime game comes down to personal tastes and prefer­
ences. Making up minor GMCs and difficulties off the cuff 
is simple, but if you want a major GMC to show up in the 
session with a full character file of their own, it pays to sit 
down and figure out at least the key traits and description 
in advance.
Here are some useful guidelines for any Cortex Prime GM, 
experienced or not.
RUNNING OFF-THE-CUFF
With a little bit of information and access to the players’ 
character files, you may have enough to run the session 
without a lot of detailed notes or background. Take a 
look at the prime sets of each character. See where the 
players have invested larger dice and more involved SFX 
or descriptions. Each character file is a player’s wish list to 
the GM, an invitation for challenge and a guide to the sort 
of action and drama the player expects to see come up.
•	 Do your players invest a lot into combat, military, 
or conflict-creating traits? Make sure that there’s a 
fight in the session, or at least something that lets 
them pull out those big guns and SFX.
•	 Are your players focusing a lot on social and 
interactive traits, or those that depend on internal 
feelings, goals, or values? Make sure those traits 
have a role to play in the session by framing scenes 
that directly call upon them.
Knowing in advance what sorts of characters your players 
have created gives you a head-start on improvising 
scenes that make sense for those characters. Don’t saddle 
your players with a session that has nothing to do with
their characters.
JULIA METZGER


=== PAGE 116 ===
112 CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
DEFINING SITUATIONS
As the GM, you get to decide what the session’s situation 
is, which is to say, what’s going on when the PCs enter the 
story in the first couple of scenes and begin to interact 
with the GMCs and their goals, as well as any locations 
and resources. Figure out what the status quo is at the 
beginning, and some circumstances that take place at 
various times that you expect the players to react to. More 
about these circumstances—or reveals—later.
Back in the late 19th century, Georges Polti wrote about the 
36 Dramatic Situations, and people who work with stories 
continue to use this handy list or others like it. Here’s his 
list to use as a baseline for your own session prep; you 
can find expanded descriptions of these online. These 
are prompts, not plots! Don’t try to write the whole story. 
They’re just the set of circumstances the protagonists—
in this case, the player characters—find themselves in. 
Pick one or two of these, flesh them out a little (that’s in 
the next section), then put them right in front of your 
characters—the story soon writes itself with the players’ 
reactions to them. Choose prompts, not plots!
A session can have more than one situation. Sometimes 
it’s fun to go with the A-Plot/B-Plot approach, where one 
situation is the primary one that involves most of the PCs, 
but there’s a second parallel situation that only involves 
one or two of the PCs. On rare occasions, and with smaller 
groups of players, you could have a situation defined for 
each player character. That’s a lot of work, but it can be 
rewarding to try once in a while. Just be aware that the 
more situations you introduce, the more screen time 
you’ll need to split up in your session’s actual play time.
DEFINING CONFLICTS AND ANTAGONISTS
The situations you choose should inspire the central 
conflict of your session, motivate your PCs to respond, 
and give you an idea as to what sort of GMCs to include. 
In some cases, you don’t actually need any GMCs to act as 
antagonists—if the players have conflicting goals of their 
own, they can serve that role without any major “bad guy” 
of your own creation. Looking at the list of 36 situations, 
many of these kinds of conflict jump right out at you.
36 DRAMATIC SITUATIONS
Abduction
Adultery
All sacrificed for passion
Ambition
An enemy loved
Conflict with a god
Crime pursued by vengeance
Crimes of love
Daring enterprise
Deliverance
Disaster
Discovery of the dishonor of a loved one
Enmity of kin
Erroneous judgment
Falling prey to cruelty/misfortune
Fatal imprudence
Involuntary crimes of love
Loss of loved ones
Madness
Mistaken jealousy
Murderous adultery
Necessity of sacrificing loved ones
Obstacles to love
Obtaining
Pursuit
Recovery of a lost one
Remorse
Revolt
Rivalry of kin
Rivalry of superior vs inferior
Self-sacrifice for an ideal
Self-sacrifice for kin
Slaying of kin unrecognized
Supplication
The enigma
Vengeance taken for kin upon kin 


=== PAGE 117 ===
Mary Rose considers the situation Discovery of 
the Dishonor of a Loved One. In that situation 
she’s got the Discoverer and the Loved One as the 
two principal characters. The conflict is that the 
Discoverer finds out that the Loved One either 
did something wrong or has been accused of 
wrongdoing. Is the Discoverer a PC, and the
Loved One a GMC? Maybe. They could both be 
GMCs, and the PCs blunder into this scenario.
Or they could both be PCs, and this is a story about 
what happens when one PC either finds out that 
another PC did something terrible in a previous 
session or hears nasty rumors spreading about 
another PC. Mary Rose might leave some of this up 
to discover in play, or she might make a decision now 
and prepare a little more ahead of the session.
Action-oriented games favor the use of GMCs as antag­
onists, so the players feel as if their characters are the 
heroes and the GM is playing the villains. That’s a classic 
setup and works for most of the situations on the list. 
However, you can also run the occasional dramatic 
primetime TV sort of session, which inverts those tropes 
and makes the PCs the “bad guys” perhaps as a result of 
their past actions—or has the group of PCs turn on each 
other, not necessarily violently or in bad faith but as a 
result of competing goals.
Don’t forget to look at the PCs’ character files for inspi­
ration, too. Distinctions and trait statements are fuel for 
great conflict that your players will want to engage with. 
While you prep your session, take some notes on which 
of those seem particularly fun to play with. If you’re using 
a pathways map or some other collaborative setting 
construct, those connections provide all the juice you 
need to stir things up and present a situation that your 
players can really engage with.
DEFINING REVEALS
A reveal is an event, a twist in the story, or a piece of
information that prods the players to take additional 
action or make a difficult choice. A reveal often looks like 
a clue, which helps direct the players toward a new loca­
tion or a confrontation with an antagonist. But a reveal 
can also be a new GMC, a shift in a goal, or a surprise 
encounter with something or someone that changes the 
status quo and forces the players to look at their character 
files and consider their options.
With your situation in mind, you can prepare a list of 
reveals for the session that, when they’re all presented 
and dealt with, resolve the situation and bring an end to 
the session. This could be a set of encounters, or a set of 
clues, or a string of cool locations to have the PCs visit, 
or some combination of these. A good rule of thumb is to 
have at least one reveal per PC, even if they’re not specif­
ically targeted toward that character, and one or more 
reveals for each major GMC, antagonist, or location you 
plan to include.
Using the Discovery of the Dishonor of a Loved One 
situation, Mary Rose establishes that the antagonist 
is a relative of Tina’s Sage, a Loved One who’s done 
something to dishonor the family. So, she needs 
at least the reveal of the dishonorable thing, but 
that’s not enough for a whole session (unless her 
players are really good at just taking this kind of 
thing and running with it). She adds in two more 
reveals: a blackmail letter written by another GMC 
who has learned of this insult to the Sage’s family, 
and a forgotten basement chamber in the Sage’s 
family home out in the country, wherein all manner 
of secrets are buried (and which might lead to other 
sessions later on).
DOMINIQUE RAMSEY


=== PAGE 118 ===
114 CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
GAME
MODERATOR
CHARACTERS
GMCs are the characters that the GM incorporates into 
the session and gets to roleplay, for better or worse. Most 
sessions have at least one major character, usually a bad 
guy or villain, who deserves a full-fledged character file 
like the PCs have. Sometimes, however, the villain just 
needs a couple of traits because the true opposition for 
the PCs is the villain’s lieutenant or majordomo. In that 
case, they’re the ones whose files are more detailed.
GMCs can reappear session after session, plaguing the 
PCs at every turn. Even if you used the villain’s full stats 
in a previous session, you’re under no obligation to re-use 
the same stats in another session. GMCs don’t have to 
follow the same rules as the players when it comes to 
character files or even XP and growth (although it’s often 
interesting if they do).
We split GMCs into a few specific types, which we detail 
after this section, but here’s a list for easy reference.
•	 Major GMCs: Characters on par with the PCs, 
with about as much detail and the same traits.
•	 Minor GMCs: Characters with fewer traits and 
less detail but still significant.
•	 Location GMCs: Set pieces for scenes that may 
have their own traits.
•	 Extras: Unnamed background characters or 
support characters with only one trait.
•	 Mobs: Groups of extras that act together as a 
single character.
•	 Bosses: Individual characters that act like a group 
of extras. 
•	 Factions/Orgs: Much larger mobs that operate at 
a higher scale than a standard mob.
MAJOR GMCS
A major GMC has the same traits as the PCs do. In a sense, 
they’re a PC that the GM happens to make the decisions 
for. Make sure that major GMCs have enough resources 
on their files to stand up to the PCs. It’s important that 
they always have at least two or three dice to roll to ensure 
that they’re worthy antagonists.
CREATING MAJOR GMCS
Major GMC characters have three power levels in Cortex 
Prime: light, medium, and heavy. Light characters should 
be the majority, as the PCs should be able to maintain the 
spotlight in most scenes. Medium characters are more 
like the PCs themselves and should be used sparingly. 
Heavy characters should be extremely rare, represent­
ing unique threats and obstacles. To keep major GMCs 
consistent from session to session, consider using the 
following guidelines when creating them:
Light: Prime set die ratings are on average a step behind 
the PCs, so if the PCs have a ⑧ in their attributes, affili­
ations, or values, the GMC has a ⑥. The GMC has fewer 
total steps (or points) in traits like skills or signature 
assets, usually by about half. 
Medium: Prime set die ratings, skills, signature assets, 
and other traits all function at the same average rating 
and number of steps or points as the PCs. 
Heavy: Prime set die ratings are on average the same as 
the PCs, but at least one if not more of them is a step ahead 
of the PCs. Add half again as many skills, signature asset 
points, and other traits. 


=== PAGE 119 ===
115
CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
MINOR GMCS
A minor GMC isn’t a significant headliner in the session 
but will nevertheless interact with the PCs in some 
fashion. The powerful villain may be a minor GMC if your 
players are mostly interacting with her lieutenants.
CREATING MINOR GMCS
Minor GMCs get at least three traits that can be anything—
they don’t have to be attributes, skills, or distinctions. 
They’re just dice with appropriate descriptive labels, like 
Corrupt Lawman ⑧, Out of Shape ④, Big Shotgun ⑧.
You can also start with a light major GMC and scale them 
back a lot—give them the same prime sets as the PCs, but 
not a lot else other than one or two key traits. The traits 
should provide details about the GMC and some ideas of 
which rolls use a higher level of skill, so don’t use a char­
acter’s name as a trait (such as Sherlock Holmes ⑧). You 
have a lot of flexibility with minor GMCs and it’s usually 
quick to come up with them if needed.
Minor GMCs always have a name, even if you come up 
with it on the spur of the moment. This helps separate 
them from the extras that populate the setting.
LIE SETIAWAN


=== PAGE 120 ===
116 CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
LOCATIONS AS GMCS
Locations can have traits like minor GMCs when they 
might be used to oppose your PCs. These are like fixed 
assets or complications that help the GM describe where 
the action takes place. If a player can justify using a 
location-based trait in their own dice pools, they can 
do so. Locations may be listed on a character file, too: 
see “Resources” on page 56. If you’re using a character 
creation system like pathways (page 73) to create the 
setting collaboratively, spend some time writing up the 
locations on the pathways map and assign them traits if 
you want them to feature strongly in sessions.
CREATING SCENE DISTINCTIONS
You can also give a location some personality by applying 
scene distinctions. These work like distinctions on char­
acters, complete with the Hinder SFX, but can be used by 
any character in the scene.
•	 Stockyard ⑧
•	 Minefield ⑧
•	 Panicked Crowd ⑧
You can expand this by adding location-specific SFX to 
a location’s scene distinctions, such as spending a ●
Ⓟ to 
create location-specific assets.
PANICKED CROWD ⑧
	
ɬ Hide in the Chaos: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a Hidden ⑧ asset 
and turn Panicked Crowd ⑧ into Panicked Crowd ⑥⑥.
Both GMCs and PCs might make use of scene distinction 
SFX if they are made available.
If you’re using an action order or similar turn-tracking 
system to handle action scenes, a location that’s behav­
ing like a GMC should have its own turn in the action 
order, especially if it’s using its traits to make attacks on 
the PCs. Otherwise, assign the location to a major GMC or 
any character that’s in control of it, and have it help that 
character instead of taking its own turn.
EXTRAS
Extras are unnamed characters with only one die rating. 
Extras may be a part of a character file: see “Resources” 
on page 56. Extras come into play as an additional die the 
GM includes in an opposition dice pool for a test. They can 
also gang up (page 100) with a minor or major GMC by 
adding their die to a GMC’s dice pool in a contest.
CREATING AN EXTRA
Something as simple as Hired Assassin ⑩, Grizzled Fur 
Trapper ⑧, or Cut-Rate Thief ⑥ works just fine. If you like, 
add another trait during play as things progress; you can 
upgrade any extra to a minor GMC this way. If the extra is 
part of a character file, it might already have a die rating, 
so you can use that in a pinch. Extras can be taken out by 
complications or stress higher than their base trait die.
While prepping your session’s situation and reveals, you 
can jot down a list of fun extras to include. But I’ll tell you 
a secret: I never prepare extras in advance. They’re so easy 
to make, I toss them in whenever they’re needed.
THOMAS SCHOLES


=== PAGE 121 ===
117
CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
MOBS
A mob is a group of extras that acts together like a minor 
GMC. You can use them just like you’d use any single 
GMC, but they represent a whole bunch of thugs, mooks, 
pawns, or goons. You can also use this rule for swarms 
of things. For a variation on this approach see the Crisis 
Pools mod on page 33.
CREATING A MOB
Mobs have a single mob trait with multiple dice repre­
senting the size of the mob. All of these trait dice are 
included in the mob’s dice pool. A useful rule of thumb is: 
The size of the dice depends on the relative skill or expe­
rience of the mob’s members:
EXAMPLE MOBS
Here are three examples of mobs of varying 
sizes and strengths.
DICE QTY
NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS
2
a handful of people
3
a dozen
4
a roomful of people
5
a large crowd
DICE SIZE
SKILL LEVEL
⑥
rabble or thugs
⑧
trained guards or soldiers
⑩
elites and veterans
ZOE BADINI
JESSICA FONG
ANTHONY
“ROBOTPENCIL”
JONES
HIT SQUAD
Highly trained cadre of 
professional murderers.
MOB TRAIT:
Mob of Assassins
⑧ Tactics
⑧ Sabotage
⑩ Hand-to-Hand
⑩ Rifle
⑥ Intimidation
PITCHFORK-
WIELDING VILLAGERS
You stand between them and 
grassroots justice against
the monsters.
MOB TRAIT:
Mob of Villagers
⑥ Pitchfork
⑥ Angry
GOBLIN REPAIR TEAM
They’ve got pipes to fix and don’t 
take kindly to interference.
MOB TRAIT:
Mob of Goblins
⑧ Engineering
⑧ Stabbing
⑩ Flee
⑥ Rowdy
You can assign traits to a mob that all of the members 
possess and include the traits in the mob’s dice pool when 
appropriate. Mobs act as a single unit but can be reduced 
in size and power by targeting their mob trait with attacks; 
each time the attack would create or step up a complica­
tion or stress that exceeds the mob trait die rating, one die 
is knocked off (from ⑥⑥⑥⑥ to ⑥⑥⑥, for example) 
and the complication is removed. This represents one 
or more members of the mob being taken out. When all 
of the mob trait’s dice are removed, the whole mob is
taken out.
ANNA “SARIANNE”
NEUMANNOVÁ


=== PAGE 122 ===
118 CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
BOSSES
A boss is like a mob, except it’s a single character. A boss 
can represent a powerful opponent like a huge rampaging 
monster, or it may be a foe who outclasses the PCs not 
only in traits and skills, but in an abstract dramatic sense.
CREATING A BOSS
Bosses have a single boss trait that has multiple dice. They 
can also have distinctions, SFX, or anything else you want 
to add in. Bosses can replace major GMCs in your games 
if you prefer not to do all the work of making opponents 
who have the same game stats as your PCs.
In either case, a boss can’t be completely taken out of any 
scene until all of the boss trait’s dice are removed. If you’re 
using major GMCs with boss traits, ignore the usual rules 
for taking out characters and use this method instead.
GLOVE-WIELDING
SPACE TITAN
He’s a tyrant from outer space
who wants to end all life.
Or most of it.
BOSS TRAIT:
Titan of Space
⑩ Power Glove
⑩ Invulnerability
⑩ Cosmic Senses
	
ɬ Come at Me: When reacting to an attack from more than 
one opponent, Glove-Wielding Space Titan adds a ⑥ to 
his dice pool and keeps an additional effect die for every 
opponent attacking him.
	
ɬ Snap: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to double Power Glove and include an 
extra die in Glove-Wielding Space Titan’s result, then shut 
down Power Glove.
QUEEN
OF THE ELVES
She’s got more fey magic in
her little finger than…
you know the rest.
BOSS TRAIT:
Elven Queen
⑩ Fey Magic
⑧ Elven Presence
⑧ Politics
⑧ Sword of the Sidhe
	
ɬ Glamour: When creating magical assets using Fey Magic, 
the Queen of the Elves adds a ⑥ to her dice pool and steps 
up her effect die by one. Her magical assets persist until 
dispelled or targeted by silver, salt, or church music.
	
ɬ Air and Darkness: The Queen of the Elves may shut down 
Fey Magic and step up Sword of the Sidhe to ⑫, changing 
its name to Blade of the Unseelie. Spend a ●
Ⓟ to restore 
Fey Magic and Sword of the Sidhe.
TITANO-
GIGANTOSAUR
Humans woke him from his 
slumber under the sea and
now he’s ready to smash
their tiny cities.
BOSS TRAIT:
Giant Radioactive Dinosaur
	
ɬ Collateral Damage: Step down Stomp by one and keep up to 
three additional effect dice. Additional effect dice may only 
be used to create complications on the scene.
	
ɬ Truly Huge: When making attacks on buildings, vehicles, or 
structures, Titano-Gigantoasaur includes an additional die 
in his result and gains an Easy Target ⑥ complication.
⑫ Atomic Breath
⑫ Stomp
⑩ Thick Hide
⑧ Roar
⑧ Swim
ORIANA MENENDEZ
VANESSA MORALES
EXAMPLE BOSSES
Here’s three boss-level opponents using
a fairly basic trait set-up.
ANTHONY
“ROBOTPENCIL”
JONES


=== PAGE 123 ===
119
CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
FACTIONS AND ORGS
Factions and orgs are like mobs, but they’re much larger 
and operate at a scale above the player characters. They 
can be a simple trait with multiple dice that also uses the 
scale rules (page 100), such as keeping three dice instead 
of two. Or they can be a more complicated character, 
something like a cross between a location GMC and a 
minor GMC with a scale die.
A faction is a group of characters who follow the same 
ideology, goal, or purpose, even if they don’t always work 
together. An org is a group of characters who all work 
together to do something, even if they don’t all believe 
the same thing. So, they’re really just two names for a 
large-scale group.
CREATING A FACTION OR ORG
Begin with an idea of what the role of the faction or org 
is in the game. Make that one of their traits, such as 
Dangerous Gang ⑧, or Political Action Committee ⑩. 
Then multiply that die rating to create a mob trait. Add 
other single-die traits to give some context and additional 
dice to the faction or org’s pool (since they work on a scale 
above the PCs). You can give the faction or org one or more 
SFX and distinctions to introduce some tricks that seem 
relevant to their overall purpose and scope.
If the faction or org is connected to a PC (see “Resources,” 
page 56) you might not need to do a full write-up, but if 
you want them to have a role beyond just being something 
to aid the PCs, writing them up is a good idea.
ANTAGONIST PAC
This is a political action
committee dedicated to making 
life as difficult as possible for 
PCs involved in politics, law 
enforcement, or activism.
MOB TRAIT:
Political Action Committee
⑩ Economics
⑧ Bureaucracy
⑩ Wealth
	
ɬ Smear Campaign: Add a ⑥ and step up Antagonist PAC’s 
effect die when targeting individuals in public life with 
rumors, gossip, or lies.
	
ɬ Back Again: When Antagonist PAC is reduced to a single 
Political Action Committee die, it’s taken out. Recover 
all dice and return to activity in the next session when a PC 
rolls a hitch.
SCALE
THE SOUTH
STREET JACKDAWS
This gang of miscreants and 
brutes operates behind the 
scenes to rough up the PC’s 
informants, friends, and allies.
MOB TRAIT:
Dangerous Gang
⑧ Violence
⑩ Threats
⑧ Crime
	
ɬ Send in the Boys: Choose up to 4 Dangerous Gang dice and 
form a mob to attack the PCs directly. Dice that are taken 
out from this mob reduce Dangerous Gang for this org 
for the remainder of this session and recover for the next 
session. Traits for this mob are stepped down by one from 
the org’s traits (Violence ⑥, Threats ⑧, Crime ⑥) until 
the next session.
	
ɬ Shakedown: When attacking another org, the South Street 
Jackdaws add a ⑥ and step up their effect die by one. If 
they fail their attack, their opponent may keep an additional 
effect die.
SCALE
ORDER OF
SHOG-THEMA
This secretive cult worships
a mysterious entity from
beyond the stars.
MOB TRAIT:
Mystic Cult
⑧ Ritual Magic
⑧ Subterfuge
⑩ Occult Library
⑧ Kidnap
	
ɬ Infiltrate Org: Spend a ●
Ⓟ and remove one Mystic Cult die 
to create an Infiltrator ⑧ asset within an enemy org or 
faction. The Order or any of its affiliate GMCs may use this 
asset when acting against the infiltrated org or faction.
If discovered, it becomes a Turncoat complication on
the Order.
	
ɬ The Stars Are Right: When creating a Summoned Demon 
asset, spend a ●
Ⓟ and remove one Mystic Cult die to step 
up Ritual Magic by one. Set aside any hitches as bonus 
effect dice to use on additional Summoned Demon assets.
SCALE
COUPLE OF KOOKS
GRACE P. FONG
TAMMY & CHAD STREET
EXAMPLE FACTIONS AND ORGS
Here’s three examples of factions and orgs
using simple traits.


=== PAGE 124 ===
Play opening scenes to introduce each PC,
either alone or in groups.
Introduce the situation and the first reveal.
Use action and bridge scenes to introduce
more reveals, following the PCs’ choices.
Bring things to a climactic scene once all
reveals are checked off.
Play tag scenes to wrap things up and take
care of growth, XP, or milestones.
All of the types of scenes discussed here are explained 
in greater detail in Prime Scenes, beginning on page 89.
RUNNING A SESSION
Now that you’ve got a situation or two, your conflicts and 
reveals, and your GMCs, you’re ready to put it all together 
and see what happens when the players get involved.
D. Vincent Baker has an excellent turn of phrase: “Play to 
find out what happens.” This is a good mantra for Cortex 
Prime and reminds us that the game is collaborative and 
full of discovery. But it’s also a game that relies on a shared 
narrative sense based on movies, television, and other 
media. So, we want to combine all of that into a loose 
structure that looks like this:
1
2
3
4
5
HAO SHUANG


=== PAGE 125 ===
121
CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
OPENING SCENES
As the GM, you need to know where all of the PCs are 
before you spring the first situation on them. Your opening 
scenes serve two purposes. The first is to establish what’s 
going on before the session starts, what each PC’s current 
status is. Are they traveling? Are they with their friends in 
a bar? Are they locked up in a jail, awaiting sentence? Are 
they neck-deep in social obligations at court?
The second purpose is to give you a chance to tease parts 
of the situation before you actually bring it in. Drop a 
couple of hints in each scene about what’s to come, such 
as a storm on the horizon (literally or figuratively), or by 
asking leading questions of the players, like “How well 
did you pack for this trip?” or “Who did you leave behind 
when you set out to the bar this evening?” or “Which of 
the Queen’s handmaidens is missing from the gala?”
INTRODUCING
THE SITUATION
Your first big action scene drops the PCs right into the 
story to establish the situation, bringing at least some of 
them together and letting them play off each other and off 
any GMC you use here. Classic story structure confronts 
the protagonists (the PCs) with something they can’t 
resolve right away—a villain is too strong for them and 
has them on the ropes before she takes off—or a mystery 
they don’t have the answers to just yet. Some players really 
don’t like to have their PCs made examples of right off 
the bat, so a common technique is to foreshadow a later 
conflict or telegraph the main antagonist’s goals through 
smaller or less important characters. This implies that 
there’s some greater force at work but doesn’t make the 
PCs look like chumps.
You want to drop the first reveal in this scene. This sets 
up the format for the rest of the session, with each scene 
framed and designed around a reveal for the PCs, one step 
toward that climactic resolution of the situation. This first 
reveal is often some kind of clue dropped by the villain, or 
a supporting character giving some important news about 
the conflict that’s to come. The reveal might be the scene 
itself, as the status quo starts to change, and the PCs are 
forced to confront that.
BRIDGE SCENES
After playing a few sessions, you’ll have a sense of when 
the PCs need to take a break and regroup, recover, or 
research. A good rule of thumb is to run a bridge scene 
once every PC has been involved in an action scene of 
some kind, either alone or in groups. Often a bridge scene 
comes at a time that seems obvious—everyone’s taken 
loads of complications or stress, information or resources 
are sparse, and so on—but it’s a good idea to frame one 
or more bridge scenes to connect one reveal to another 
either across time or space (putting the PCs in downtime, 
or in travel time).
MODERATING
GM CHARACTERS
In each session it’s the GM’s responsibility to use GMCs to 
demonstrate the situation, serve as antagonists, allies, or 
obstacles, and to take part in one or more reveals. They’re 
your characters, but they’re more pliable and transient 
than the PCs. The key to successfully moderating GMCs 
is to use them both as part of the setting and as a tool 
to move the story along. Don’t get too attached to them, 
but make sure they’re as appealing and notable as they 
need to be.


=== PAGE 126 ===
When a GMC is present in the scene, introduce them as 
part of your scene framing. Don’t forget to paint a picture 
of them in your players’ minds with more senses than 
just the visual. Looking over your GMC writeup (or your 
hastily scribbled prep notes), find at least three things to 
say about them, and make sure you say those things at 
some point early in the scene.
GMCs aren’t just for action scenes. Especially when you’re 
using a GMC to push against the connections between 
your PCs, or to remind the players about the themes and 
goals of your setting, you should make use of your GMCs 
in bridge scenes and flashbacks as well as in the standard 
action scenes. 
RUNNING THE CLIMAX
Once everything seems to have come to a head, all reveals 
are known and checked off your list, and you’ve got the 
PCs all together working toward the same outcomes, 
you’ve got a climactic scene to run. Here’s where the 
villain’s plan is foiled for good (or until next time), the 
disaster is thwarted, the challenge is overcome, and so on.
Here’s the big, big, big secret with this part of the session: 
you have not prepared for this part. Seriously. This isn’t 
something you should have written notes on before the 
session, because you never know where the players will 
take your situation and your conflict and your reveals. 
So, in some ways, it’s flying by the seat of your pants time.
A good climax brings back all of the various decisions and 
choices the players made during the session in one way 
or another. This is where consequences of earlier actions 
come to the fore. The players get to use some of the assets, 
complications, and ●
Ⓟ they’ve built up in past scenes. 
And it resolves the situation for the PCs, even if it creates 
another one for the next session, and even if the PCs didn’t 
come out ahead.
It’s tempting to wrap everything up here, in this last big 
scene, but you’ve still got some tag scenes to go. Leave 
some story threads to be picked up and woven into the 
growth of the PCs during those scenes. You don’t need 
to resolve the tangled weave of minor and major GMCs 
in the climax, because some of them will get their just 
deserts later. Recurring characters provide continuity, 
after all! What’s important is that the players feel as if, 
despite some loose ends, the status quo has changed.
TAG SCENES
Find a way to reflect the session’s overall themes and 
motifs in tag scenes. As you go around the table and 
frame scenes with questions and reflections about what 
the PCs have done, you can also insert a bit of exposition 
and update the players on what happened to GMCs or 
other people who they perhaps lost sight of, or who didn’t 
show up again in later scenes.
Tag scenes are also about growth, marking XP, checking 
off milestones, and so on. Make them poignant, 
make them specific, and most of all 
make them short.


=== PAGE 127 ===
123
CHAPTER 4 PRIME SESSIONS
SESSION TRICKS
So, you’ve run a few sessions and have a handle on them. 
What now? Here are a few suggestions for mixing it up
a little.
VERY SPECIAL EPISODES
If your usual sessions are heavy on group-based conflict 
against external antagonists (good guys vs bad guys, 
for example) think about what those TV shows back in 
the Eighties and Nineties did, and have a very special 
episode that’s more introspective, more inward focused, 
and highlighting some cause, relationship problem, or 
complex issue.
In these sessions, there might not be a classic antagonist. 
Instead, some external yet deeply personal thing gets in 
the way of the PCs’ existing relationships. Look over the 
player character files and see what exciting “negative” 
traits might make for a good subject. Addiction? Long-
lost uncle? Mysterious past? Unhealthy attitudes toward 
violence or food or the government? Pick one and see what 
happens when it becomes the situation.
FLASHBACK SESSIONS
Maybe you’ve used flashback scenes in your sessions, but 
have you ever set the entire session in the past? This is a 
great way to explore character backstory that up until this 
point has only been brought up in hindsight. Play out that 
last pitched battle with the Empire alongside the rebels. 
Get an insight into that moment the world-threatening 
supervillain became the terrible threat he is now. See how 
that faction or org became the influential agency that the 
PCs know it as—and what the PCs did at the time to help 
make it that way.
Flashback sessions are also fun for taking a break from 
the primary PC group and playing one-shot PCs just for 
this purpose. Play out the days from when the zombie 
plague broke out—it’s less of a concern if one-shot PCs 
die or lose to the overwhelming forces of the past. Make 
one of the PCs the primary character, while everyone else 
plays that PC’s hapless former squad, whose fates were 
never revealed—until now.
ROTATING GM DUTIES
After a few sessions as GM, a lot of folks like to jump into 
the story as a player for a special one-shot episode, and 
let another player take on the GM role. You can tie this in 
with a flashback session or you can instead play it out as 
something that happened at the same time as the previ­
ous session.
HAO SHUANG
This works best once everyone knows enough about the 
setting that one of the players can take the reins. Rotating 
GMs can afford a player the chance to get some experi­
ence running the game when they’re not ready to commit 
to regularly running sessions.
When you’re a one-shot GM in a long-running serial, be 
fair to the regular GM and the other players and don’t 
uproot the entire setting, wipe out popular locations, 
or kill off favorite GMCs. By all means, introduce your 
own GMCs, locations, and motivations. The events that 
transpire in a session with a new GM can easily be rein­
corporated to the regular GM’s game, too.
IT WAS ALL A DREAM
You can’t pull this too often, but a dream session is a nice 
way to explore ideas the players might have for the game 
that didn’t fit in previous sessions. Write up notes for a 
dream session with the premise that the PCs are dream­
ing an alternate reality in which their actions had other 
consequences. Or it’s an illusionary world created by a 
mystical antagonist GMC, and the PCs spend the whole 
session in strange garb from another setting (such as 
pirates or fantasy heroes).
You can declare that the previous session was the dream 
as a way to reset things (especially if several PCs died, or 
horrible things happened to them that were upsetting 
or discouraging). Used like this, the It Was All A Dream 
session is damage control that everyone can buy into.


=== PAGE 128 ===
KINIXUKI
