
=== PAGE 185 ===
181
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
CHAPTER BREAKDOWN
Here’s what you can find in this chapter of miscellanea. Much 
of it is aimed squarely at fantasy or superhero settings, but 
any of it can serve as inspiration for Cortex Prime games 
using supernatural, science fiction, or surreal genre elements.
The Power List: A list of power traits, SFX, and limits for use
in superhero and supernatural settings.
The Ability List: A list of abilities, suitable for use in more 
narrative-heavy settings with superpowers or supernatural traits.
Fantasy Milestones: A list of milestones for use in traditional 
fantasy and other fantastical settings.
The Motor Pool: Rules for creating vehicles in Cortex Prime.
Characters from the Cortex Multiverse: A collection of 
sample characters created by backers you can use as written or
as inspiration for creating your own characters.
Prime Lists is a chapter full of lists. There are lists of examples of SFX, powers, abilities, 
and milestones. It also includes supplemental mods on vehicles, expanding how these 
work in the game beyond signature assets or traits on a character file. There's an 
eclectic collection of pre-built characters you can use as inspiration for your own 
game and characters. 
PRIME
LISTS
CHAPTER 6


=== PAGE 186 ===
182 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
THE POWER LIST
This section goes into greater detail about the individual 
power traits listed in Prime Characters on page 51, as well 
as power-based SFX and limits. Powers can be used as 
part of power sets or incorporated into other aspects of 
the rules (such as distinctions or talents) or re-skinned 
to serve as the building blocks of spells for heroic fantasy 
or the abilities of monsters and supernatural creatures.
A power set generally looks something like this:
STRANGE VISITOR
FROM ANOTHER DIMENSION
ATTACK POWERS (BLASTS, WEAPONS)
Whether it’s an energy blast or razor-sharp claws, any 
power that represents an attack fits in this category. Use 
these guidelines for rating attack powers in a power set:
At ⑥, the power is roughly equivalent to small arms 
fire or dangerous close combat weapons.
At ⑧, the power is capable of greater injury or harm, 
roughly equivalent to automatic rifles or grenades.
At ⑩, the power is equivalent to heavy explosives or 
lightning bolts.
At ⑫, the power is truly devastating, even if the area 
of effect isn’t widespread.
An attack power’s name gives you more suggestions about 
when it works. Often, the attack uses a specific type of 
energy, such as fire, electricity, cold, or radiation. This may 
affect how you describe the effects of stress caused by the 
attack and by other powers or SFX that provide resistance 
to those types. A generic Energy Blast is usually explo­
sive plasma or cosmic energy with few side effects, unlike 
Flame Blasts or Lightning Bolts that might set things on 
fire, or Cold Blasts that freeze. Psychic Blasts can target 
heavily armored foes but they’re useless against oppo­
nents without minds.
Some attacks may be used at range, while others are only 
effective in close quarters. Whether this is an advantage 
or a drawback varies on the situation. It’s easier to target 
a flying target with a Force Blast than with Elbow Spikes, 
but in a confined space the Force Blast poses problems 
the Elbow Spikes do not.
VENUS BAMBISA
Enhanced Speed ⑧
Enhanced Stamina ⑧
Heat Vision ⑧
Superhuman Durability ⑩
Superhuman Strength ⑩
Supersonic Flight ⑩
	
ɬ SFX: Bulletproof: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to ignore physical stress
or complications for a test or contest unless caused
by magic.
	
ɬ SFX: Mightiest Mortal: Use two or more Strange Visitor 
from Another Dimension powers in a single dice pool and 
step each power down by one for each additional power 
beyond the first.
	
ɬ Limit: Tellurite Allergy: When exposed to tellurite mineral 
or anything powered by tellurite energy, shut down a 
Strange Visitor from Another Dimension power and gain 
a complication of the same size to gain a ●
Ⓟ. Once out of 
range of the tellurite, eliminate the complication to recover 
the power.
POWER DESCRIPTIONS
In the following descriptions, we assume you're using 
stress as well as complications. If you’re not, all instances 
of stress can be replaced with complications without 
much effort. Other mods can be integrated by following 
the general guidelines for those mods.
Some powers start at ⑧, rather than ⑥. These include 
Durability, Intelligence, Reflexes, Stamina, and Strength. 
There’s no reason you can’t include a ⑥ die rating level 
for them, but we assume that any of these enhancement 
powers truly kick in at ⑧, with ⑥ being “human level.”
As always, you can change the names or customize the 
specific version of these powers as needed. “Attack” or 
“movement” are general categories rather than actual 
powers, for example.


=== PAGE 187 ===
183
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
DURABILITY
Whatever the reason, the character is more resistant to 
injury and harmful effects than the average human.
Enhanced Durability ⑧ represents toughened skin 
and muscle, as well as the ability to withstand most 
minor blunt trauma or pain and low-level extremes of 
heat or cold.
Superhuman Durability ⑩ is bulletproof skin and 
resistance to extreme temperatures or hazards.
Godlike Durability ⑫ indicates invulnerability
to almost all conventional forms of injury and 
harmful effects.
Durability is also used in power sets that represent force 
fields or hardened objects. Use common sense and the 
descriptions in the power set as your guide for when you 
can factor in Durability. A character that can project 
a force field may not be able to apply that Durability 
against light-based attacks, while a character whose 
Durability represents steel-hard skin can’t apply it against
psychic blasts.
Durability usually, but not always, comes with an assumed 
level of life support or protection from the environment. 
This might indicate that the character can shrug off 
certain environmental conditions such as heat or cold. 
Whether this life support is continuous or only when the 
character is using the power may depend on SFX or how 
the Durability is described.
Energy powers are typically resisted by Durability. Some 
SFX protect against other, more specific types of harm—
such as disease or toxins—over and above any protection 
Durability might give. For example, a power set that 
includes Durability might have the Immune SFX against 
poison. For protection against magic or psychic powers, 
use Mystic Resistance or Psychic Resistance.
ELEMENTAL CONTROL POWERS 
(INCLUDING INFLUENCE, MASTERY,
AND SUPREMACY)
The ability to control the elements is a common power trait 
for superheroes. How “elements” is defined can vary from 
character to character. They aren’t necessarily elements 
in the periodic table sense, or the classical elements of 
air, fire, earth, and water—in many cases they’re more 
properly categorized as energy types or compounds.
For the purposes of the game, the material, energy, or 
substance being controlled is called an element. Each 
elemental control power trait must be specified, i.e., Fire, 
Light, Magnetic.
Elemental Influence ⑥ gives minor or basic 
control: extinguishing the candles in a room; cooling 
the air in a room; shorting out household appliances.
Elemental Control ⑧ gives significant local 
control: extinguishing a burning room; snap-freezing 
the air in a room; shorting out the electrical system 
of a building.
Elemental Mastery ⑩ provides citywide control: 
extinguishing a burning skyscraper; freezing over a 
city street; bringing down a city’s power grid.
Elemental Supremacy ⑫ provides regional 
control: extinguishing a forest fire; freezing over 
Lake Michigan; rerouting the national power grid.
Elemental control powers offer many opportunities for 
stunts; when tied together with SFX, they may be applied 
in dozens of ways. The basic rule of thumb is that the 
larger the die rating, the greater the scope of the power’s 
control effect. Elemental Influence ⑥ usually only extends
to one or two types of effect, while Elemental Supremacy ⑫ 
indicates the unsurpassed ability to manipulate the 
controlled element.
ELEMENTS TO CONTROL
Here’s a list of the common elements in comic book universes.
Air: Moving air masses around, increasing or decreasing air pressure, 
creating whirlwinds
Cosmic: Channeling and redirecting the quantum power of the universe, 
altering or destroying the bonds between energy and matter, and 
connecting with the cosmos
Earth: Moving soil, dirt, and rock; shaping it or altering its consistency
Electric: Strengthening, weakening, redirecting, and otherwise altering 
the properties of electrical current
Fire/Heat: Rapidly increasing the thermal properties of the environment, 
shaping existing flame, combusting materials
Gravity: Intensifying or diminishing the hold the Earth’s gravitational 
field has on objects, shifting centers of gravity
Ice/Cold: Rapidly decreasing the thermal properties of the environment, 
producing ice, freezing things
Kinetic/Telekinetic: Intensifying or diminishing the stored kinetic 
potential of objects, moving things around, holding them in place
Light: Intensifying or diminishing the ambient light in the environment, 
creating bright flashes, forming holograms
Magnetic: Strengthening, weakening, redirecting, or otherwise 
manipulating magnetic fields, affecting ferrous metals
Negative: Summoning and manipulating negatively charged energy
or darkness
Sonic: Intensifying or diminishing the ambient sound in the environment, 
altering sound waves, mimicking noises
Weather: Anticipating, directing, and manipulating local and regional 
weather patterns to create meteorological effects from rain and snow 
to wind and drought
Water: Moving aqueous masses around, increasing or decreasing water 
volume and pressure, dehydrating a living target


=== PAGE 188 ===
184 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
Note that Mind Control and other psychic powers aren’t 
considered elemental control powers. The same is true 
for Sorcery, which is its own power trait type. Psychics or 
sorcerers often possess some of these elemental powers, 
of course; Kinetic/Telekinetic Control, Fire Control, and 
Weather Control are frequently psychic in nature.
Some elemental control powers overlap; you can create 
frosty conditions using both Ice Control and Weather 
Control, though the former has more accuracy and depth 
than the latter. Magnetic Supremacy could alter electri­
cal currents and other types of energy, though this is 
likely better represented by a stunt than SFX. This sort 
of overlap is more likely at the Mastery and Supremacy 
levels; Influence and Control rarely allow the character to 
step outside the standard boundaries of those elements.
To properly represent the kinds of abilities associated with 
characters with elemental control, these power sets also 
include powers like Energy Blast, Flight, or Senses, and 
SFX like Area Attack, Energy Absorption, and Multipower.
INTANGIBILITY
The character is able to become less solid, either through 
reduced molecular density, shifting phase, or becoming 
fluid. The primary effect of this power trait is that passing 
through obstacles becomes much easier, and physical 
objects pass through the body.
Intangibility ⑥ lets you mildly disperse your 
molecules, reducing the impact of some physical 
attacks and allowing you to slowly move through 
highly porous or permeable obstacles such as
chicken wire fences or barred gates.
Intangibility ⑧ represents substantial fluidity or 
dispersal, giving you the power to seep through tiny 
holes in obstacles and reduce the impact of most 
physical attacks.
Intangibility ⑩ makes you ghostlike or out of 
phase, letting you walk through almost any physical 
obstacle other than super-high-density substances, 
and making very little noise. Physical attacks rarely 
affect you.
Intangibility ⑫ makes you completely out of
phase with reality, including even energy waveforms. 
You’re essentially not even there.
Intangibility is frequently associated with power sets that 
describe transforming into liquids or, at low ratings, the 
ability to deform or compress your body. A close cousin to 
Stretch, it’s often included in the same power sets. If the 
power set represents molecular or dimensional phasing, 
powers like Flight or Airwalk are common.
SFX in power sets with Intangibility include being able to 
disrupt people or things by phasing or passing through 
them and sharing your Intangibility with others.
INTELLIGENCE
The character has enhanced reasoning, mathematical, or 
analytical faculties linked to intelligence. Many people 
are smart, but this superpower puts you above the rest. 
It’s almost always used to create assets or apply complica­
tions, and to enhance the use of several specialties.
Enhanced Intelligence ⑧ means you’re able to 
handle complex mental problems easily, including 
calculation, recall, and applied knowledge.
Super Intelligence ⑩ means you’re a living 
computer, with a mind that processes information 
and sensory input with dazzling speed, running 
numerous simultaneous rational operations,
and able to recall vast amounts of information
and data when needed.
Godlike Intelligence ⑫ places you beyond 
terrestrial computers, forming connections in 
your mind between apparently unrelated facts, 
solving impossibly difficult puzzles or mathematical 
problems, and possessing nigh-instant access
to countless storehouses of knowledge that
you’ve collected.
Intelligence pairs well with Senses, as well as other powers 
such as Reflexes or psychic powers. It acts as a sort of 
generic “smartest guy in the room” power that substi­
tutes in for specialist knowledge from skills or specialties 
but doesn’t entirely replace them: even having Godlike 
Intelligence doesn’t mean you can’t also benefit from 
having a high rating in the Know skill.
INVISIBILITY
The character can hide in plain sight, whether through the 
bending of light waves, high-tech chameleon technology, 
or shifting out of phase with this dimension.
Invisibility ⑥ blurs or obscures your visual image; 
it’s often limited to obscuring your image in mirrors 
or electronic surveillance, or in situations where 
vision is already impaired, such as at night. It may also 
be a psychic field that makes others pay less attention 
to you, even though you’re still visible.
At Invisibility ⑧, you’re concealed to a greater 
degree, such as with chameleon-like blending, ghost-
like transparency, or psychic misdirection. While 
still visible to others if they focus, you’ve got the 
equivalent of a stealth field.


=== PAGE 189 ===
185
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
Invisibility ⑩ renders you completely invisible 
to standard visual means. You can move around 
without being noticed, and you don’t leave a shadow 
or other sign of being there. Certain spectrums of 
visual detection may spot you, such as infrared or 
dimensional locators.
At Invisibility ⑫, you are impossible to detect 
with any visual-based sense. You never show up 
on any device, and likely don’t even give off energy 
signatures of any kind.
Depending on how this is defined within a power set, 
Invisibility may be psychic or physics based. If it’s psychic, 
that affects how others might detect the character. If 
it’s physics, sometimes all you need to do is to turn up 
the sound detection to realize an invisible character is 
nearby. This power trait when combined with others like 
Intangibility or Flight can essentially make the character 
a phantom or apparition.
MIMIC
This power isn’t changing shape into other forms or to 
look like other people—that’s Shapeshift. Mimic is copying 
or even stealing powers from others. It may also be used to 
represent a character who has no fixed powers but instead 
spontaneously creates them as the need arises.
To manifest a power, the character must create an asset 
with a test or contest using this power’s die. Sometimes, 
the character must physically touch or cause stress to the 
target; in other cases, the character can just develop a 
power. The description and SFX usually define how this 
works. The asset created serves as the power trait in the 
short term.
Mimic’s die rating directly corresponds to the character’s 
ability to effectively copy or mimic another power. The 
scope and extent of the copied power is limited by Mimic’s 
die rating. If you want to copy or steal Flight as a power 
and only have Mimic ⑧, you won’t be capable of super­
sonic speed. You might create a ⑫ asset to represent 
Flight and roll that die into any tests or contests, but the 
actual speed won’t be the equivalent of space flight.
Heroes with Mimic usually have a number of SFX and 
limits that refine the power. Including other powers in 
the power set, such as Shapeshift, allows the character to 
also copy others’ appearance and form.
MOVEMENT POWERS (SPEED/FLIGHT/
SWING/AIRWALK/BURROW/LEAP/SWIM)
Movement powers confer the ability to move at greater 
than human speed. Speed is ground or surface travel, 
while Flight is air or space travel. The actual speed each 
die rating represents differs between Speed and Flight.
At Speed ⑥, you can run as fast as the world’s 
fastest humans; Flight ⑥ is the speed of a hawk
or news chopper.
At Enhanced Speed ⑧, you can run at the speed of 
a horse; with Subsonic Flight ⑧, you can fly as fast 
as a missile or passenger airliner.
At Superhuman Speed ⑩, you’re faster than a bullet 
train; with Supersonic Flight ⑩, you can fly as fast 
as a jet fighter.
At Godlike Speed ⑫, you can travel around the 
world in moments; Space Flight ⑫ permits swift 
interplanetary travel.
Other movement powers appear in power sets, too. Swing, 
Airwalk, Burrow, Swim and so forth are all movement 
powers. They generally operate at the same speed as 
the Speed power trait, but how and when they might be 
used differs. Swing lets some characters swing through 
city streets above the traffic, giving them access to 
areas others don’t have. Burrow is something subterra­
nean creatures can do that surface-dwellers can’t. Leap 
describes traveling large distances with mighty bounds 
or spring-like steps. Swim is being able to move through 
water as fast as—or faster than—an Olympic medalist.
Teleport gets its own entry since it represents crossing 
distances without movement at all.
Movement powers are often included in power sets with 
Reflexes or Stamina, but not always. Similarly, Strength 
and Leap are often found in the same power set. They’re 
usually used to guide how quickly and in what ways 
someone can get to places. Stunts created with movement 
powers factor in the velocity and speed of the power more 
than, say, the reaction time or endurance of the character. 
Movement powers that explicitly allow travel in specific 
environments are assumed to include the ability to 
survive in those environments at or beyond the ⑧ level. 
So, Enhanced Swim ⑧ affords the ability to breathe under­
water or an air supply, while Subsonic Flight ⑧ means 
you don’t suffer the negative effects of high velocity. If 
you have Space Flight ⑫, you’re not worried about the 
vacuum of space.
PSYCHIC POWERS
(MIND CONTROL/TELEPATHY/
ANIMAL CONTROL/PLANT CONTROL)
Psychic powers affect or influence other minds, although 
most people don’t include plants as minds. The two most 


=== PAGE 190 ===
186 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
common are Mind Control and Telepathy. Psychic powers 
are used to create complications on their targets. If the 
complication is stepped up beyond ⑫ and the target is 
stressed out, your effect is total. Until then, the target 
gets a chance to resist it or fight it off, with the complica­
tion making things tough for them. To cause mental or 
emotional stress, use Psychic Blast instead.
Mind Control relies on planting suggestions, influencing 
perceptions, and altering behavior—it’s getting people to 
do what you want, especially when they wouldn’t other­
wise. A complication you create with Mind Control (such 
as Fight your Friends! Or Let Us In!) hampers your target 
if they resist or try to oppose what you want them to do. If 
they go along with it, the complication doesn’t pose any 
problem for them.
At ⑥, you can push the target to do something
they were inclined to do already, such as buy 
something they like or make advances on someone 
they’re attracted to. You can also intensify their 
senses to a degree—making the room seem colder,
a smell seems stronger, or other mild effects.
At ⑧, you can override the target’s impulse control, 
remove inhibitions, or provoke irrational behavior. 
You can make them see, smell, or hear things
that aren’t there for short periods, enough to 
distract them. 
At ⑩, you can take over the target’s motor 
control and movements, create vivid and believable 
hallucinations that last for hours, or cause them to 
go against their core beliefs for a short time.
At ⑫, you can completely possess the target, create 
entire fictional universes within their mind, and 
permanently alter their beliefs or perceptions.
Telepathy is communicating with other minds, although 
it also allows reading surface or deeper thoughts, antic­
ipating actions, and sharing or altering memories. A 
complication you create with Telepathy might hamper 
your target if they’re trying to block you out, screen their 
thoughts, or remember something you’ve made them 
forget. Much of the time you won’t need to roll this power, 
especially if it’s used on willing targets. If the target isn’t 
willing, you need to take out your target (step it up beyond 
a ⑫ die rating) with the complication before you can pull 
out the information you want.
At ⑥, you can maintain a link with another mind with 
some effort, using the link to talk or share thoughts.
At ⑧, you can read surface thoughts, discern 
emotions, and share one or two senses (like sight 
and hearing), as well as link a half-dozen minds 
together for the purposes of communication.
At ⑩, you can probe minds for memories, thoughts, 
and instincts, create persistent mental links among 
large groups of people across great distances, and 
even block or influence a specific target’s memories.
At ⑫, you can remain in constant communication 
with vast numbers of people, skim the surface 
thoughts of everyone on the planet, and implant 
entirely new life histories within specific minds.
Animal Control is used to make animals do what you 
want, though how this happens can vary. Plant Control 
is the same, only with vegetable matter. These powers, 
while psychic in nature, are really a kind of elemental 
control (page 183), with the die rating representing the 
scope and power of the control. At ⑥, your influence 
and ability to connect with animals or plants is limited 
to nudges or suggestions; at ⑫, you have supremacy over 
all animal or plant life, and you may even be connected 
directly to the living web of life on the planet.
REFLEXES
The character has a greater response time, physical agility, 
and aim than an average human.
Enhanced Reflexes ⑧ represents two to three 
times the normal human response time and
hand-eye coordination.
Superhuman Reflexes ⑩ indicates as much as ten 
times the response time and coordination of
an ordinary human.
Godlike Reflexes ⑫ confers the ability to react as 
if the world around you had slowed to a crawl; you 
have lightning-fast hand-eye coordination.
MIND CONTROL, POSSESSION, AND CONSENT
Many groups aren’t comfortable with characters having the ability 
to control other characters with their mind or with mystic spells or 
possession, and that’s something that should be determined before 
you progress with your games. Possession and mind control remove 
agency from players, and in some cases that’s perfectly fine when 
there’s a high degree of player trust, but in other cases (especially 
in games with new players or strangers at a convention) it’s a no-no.
Just don’t.
It’s important that consent form a part of your group’s conversation 
about social standards at the table, as important if not moreso than 
“don’t look at your phone while it’s somebody else’s turn” or “don’t 
show up late without letting us all know.”
For more information on consent in your game and safety tools to make 
your games better, visit sites like goldenlassogames.com/tools for 
helpful links and advice.


=== PAGE 191 ===
187
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
Many characters with a Reflexes power also have move­
ment powers, although they aren’t synonymous. It’s more 
common to have both when the Reflexes power trait is 
rated at Superhuman or Godlike.
RESISTANCE
The character is resistant to types of harm or attack that 
most people have no defense against. It might be some­
thing intrinsic or provided by equipment or gear. The 
most common types are Mystic Resistance and Psychic 
Resistance. Other resistances are frequently provided by 
Durability or show up as SFX for a power set (such as being 
immune to toxins or disease).
A Resistance ⑥ is slight, but still more than any 
normal person would have.
A Resistance ⑧ is enhanced, enough to turn aside 
most standard attacks of this type.
A Resistance ⑩ is superhuman, giving substantial 
defense against most attacks of this type.
A Resistance ⑫ is godlike, representing nigh-
invulnerability to attacks of this type.
These power traits are similar to Durability in that they 
provide resistance or protection from harmful or damag­
ing attacks. SFX may also provide protection against 
specific types of attack, on top of whatever protection is 
given by a Resistance or Durability. Most characters with 
mystic or psychic powers also possess a Resistance of that 
type in their power set.
SENSES
The character’s senses are more acute, keen, or developed 
than a normal human.
Enhanced Senses ⑧ represent extraordinary levels 
of awareness, closer to those of predatory animals.
Superhuman Senses ⑩ reach beyond nature, 
offering incredible levels of awareness.
Godlike Senses ⑫ touch upon cosmic threads of 
information and perception.
It’s more or less assumed that most people have Senses at 
the ⑥ level and included in other core attributes or skills. 
Senses at a ⑥ rating are usually additional senses that 
might be brought in, like Cybernetic Sense or Mystic Sense, 
mostly to give you other ways to pick up on information.
Extraordinary senses, such as a sonar sense or sixth sense, 
are often represented by SFX that build on the characters’ 
Senses power traits to let them reroll dice in their pool. An 
android’s Cybernetic Senses on the other hand might let 
you include computer network access in a dice pool where 
non-synthetic people don’t have access.
These power traits don’t specify which senses are height­
ened. In the game, this is left up to individual character 
description. For the most part, characters with a Senses 
power enjoy heightened awareness across the spectrum, 
at least in terms of acquiring information from their 
immediate environment.
Senses often goes hand-in-hand with Intelligence in 
power sets, with Intelligence focusing on what the char­
acter is able to do with the sensory input rather than the 
ability to detect it.
SHAPESHIFT
The ability to alter how you look or to take on the form of 
something else is a great stealth power. It can also repre­
sent the use of magic to disguise one’s appearance, like a 
faerie, or the power to transform into non-human shapes, 
like certain lycanthropes or mecha characters.
At ⑥, you can make minor changes to your facial 
features or aspects of your appearance, but not 
enough to closely mimic anyone in particular.
At ⑧, you can take on the external form of someone 
else, fooling most onlookers and passing as the 
person you’re imitating. You may also be able to
take on the external form of an animal or other
living creature.
At ⑩, you may fully shift into another living physical 
form or shape, even down to the cellular level, fooling 
scientific instruments, extraordinary senses, and so 
on. Non-living shapes still register as organic.
At ⑫, you may shapeshift into anything—living and 
non-living forms—fooling even cosmic senses. For all 
intents and purposes, you become that other thing.
Shapeshift can be used to acquire things that a char­
acter doesn’t normally have access to, such as claws or 
wings. These can be represented by assets that last for the 
remainder of the scene, which might be extended with ●
Ⓟ. 
If the character regularly creates wings or claws, they’re 
probably represented by other power traits in the power 
set. A character who shapeshifts wings all the time prob­
ably has Flight as a power trait to avoid having to create 
them as a stunt or asset. A character might also have the 
Mimic power, giving them the ability to copy other powers, 
instead of or together with Shapeshift.
Shapeshift is frequently in a power set with Stretch, with 
size-changing powers like Grow or Shrink, and with 
physical enhancement powers like Durability, Stamina, 
or Strength.


=== PAGE 192 ===
188 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
If a character only ever shapeshifts into one form, they 
probably don’t have this power. Instead, their power set 
would include powers that describe their other form (such 
as Durability or Reflexes), and a limit that shuts down 
these powers when they’re not in the alternate form.
SIZE-CHANGING POWERS
(GROW, SHRINK)
With these powers, the character can grow or shrink.
At ⑥, you can bulk up considerably (Grow) or 
compress your mass tightly (Shrink). This doesn’t 
change your overall height or weight so much as it 
represents being able to snap out of or slip from 
restraints, fit into cramped spaces, or look
somewhat more menacing.
With Grow ⑧, you can grow to at least fifteen feet, 
more than doubling in size. With Shrink ⑧, you can 
reduce your size to that of a doll or small animal.
With Grow ⑩, you can grow to the size of a 
building, upwards of a hundred feet. With
Shrink ⑩, you can become insect sized.
With Grow ⑫, you can become truly massive, 
perhaps without limit, almost a geographic
formation of your own. With Shrink ⑫, you
can become microscopic, reducing your size
to the sub-molecular level.
Use size-changing powers when you think that being 
really big or really small could be helpful in a dice pool 
or let you change the situation in a scene. They’re almost 
always included in a power set with other power traits—
Grow with Strength, Durability, or Stamina; Shrink 
with Reflexes, Flight, or Senses. You cannot use both 
size-changing powers at the same time—it makes no 
sense to roll both Grow and Shrink. Power sets with these 
powers have a limit that shuts down associated power 
traits along with Grow or Shrink. In other words, if you 
have Superhuman Strength and Superhuman Durability 
while you’re a giant, shutting down Grow shuts those 
down also.
Is it easier for opponents to hit you when you’re fifty feet 
tall? Are you less of a target when you’re the size of an ant? 
Ensure that a limit in your power set handles the former 
(Huge: Earn a ●
Ⓟ when your Grow becomes a complica­
tion for you) and use your die in a contest to handle the 
latter (that Shrink ⑩ sure helps avoid danger!).
SORCERY
The character has the ability to alter or change magical 
fields or to channel power from other dimensions to
affect change in this one.
At Novice ⑥, you can achieve the equivalent of 
parlor tricks, prestidigitation, and conjuring without 
needing stage magic equipment. Nothing more than 
pulling out long scarves, lighting a candle with a snap 
of the fingers, or concealing doves in a cage.
At Adept ⑧, you have genuine powers of 
summoning and controlling mystic forces—
usually to create constructs and illusions,
commune with other dimensions, and invoke
changes in the laws of physics.
At Master ⑩, you have great mystical powers, 
channeling power into longer lasting constructs or 
objects, bending the laws of physics, and dispelling 
the magical works of others.
At Supreme ⑫, you can draw on world-shattering 
mystic power to affect far-reaching changes, bring 
things to and from other dimensions, and empower 
mystical objects or creatures of frightening strength.
Sorcery may seem overwhelming or too powerful, but 
it’s really just another form of elemental control. The 
descriptive nature of Sorcery makes for flashy effects 
and interesting stunts, assets, and complications, but 
the power itself shouldn’t be more potent than others. 
It’s included in power sets with power traits that 
represent specific magical effects, from Mystic Blast 
and Flight to Strength and Teleport. Sorcery can’t
usually inflict stress on its own, but it can create assets 
and complications.
Note that an Enchant or Know (Occult) skill allows for 
other avenues into occult lore, including rituals, items of 
power, and knowledge. Heroes with Sorcery usually have 
a skill or specialty like this.
STAMINA
The character has increased endurance and staying 
power, as well as recuperative ability and resistance to 
fatigue or toxins. 
Enhanced Stamina ⑧ indicates faster than normal 
healing and recovery, resistance to minor diseases, 
and the ability to perform at maximum effort for an 
hour or more.
Superhuman Stamina ⑩ allows for rapid recovery 
from injury, resistance to most terrestrial diseases or 


=== PAGE 193 ===
toxins, and the ability to operate at maximum effort 
for several hours.
Godlike Stamina ⑫ indicates extremely rapid 
recovery from even near-fatal wounds or trauma, 
resistance to even extraterrestrial diseases, and 
almost limitless ability to operate at maximum effort.
Stamina is most used for recovery, but it can also be used 
against attacks that target a character’s endurance or 
staying power, or try to induce paralysis, sleep, or fatigue. 
If a character is holding their breath or some other more 
active effort, you might use Stamina in the dice pool.
Stamina extends the character’s lifespan, too, if that ever 
comes into question, though it won’t necessarily prevent 
aging so much as keep the effects of aging from slowing 
the character down. Heroes with a Stamina power are 
more resistant to chemical substances like drugs, alcohol, 
and caffeine and can’t get drunk or high.
STRENGTH
The character has strength and muscular power beyond 
that of a normal human.
Enhanced Strength ⑧ allows you to flip cars, break 
through solid barriers, and bend ordinary iron bars.
Superhuman Strength ⑩ allows you to lift and 
throw vehicles, smash through stone and metal,
and tear apart most barriers.
Godlike Strength ⑫ confers the power to hurl 
objects into orbit, push over tall buildings, and 
demolish most structures.
This very common superpower represents everything 
from mutant-enhanced musculature to high-tech 
powered armor. As with many power traits, it’s often 
assumed to just work if there’s nothing challenging the 
character, or if using Strength is part of the goal of a test 
(like ripping a telephone pole out of the ground to smash 
a tank).
It’s usually, though not always, included in a power set 
with Durability, often at a different die rating. It may also 
be used with Leap, representing the use of Strength to 
leap great distances.
If the Strength is only in one limb or otherwise limited 
to specific conditions, this is just part of the power set’s 
definition. There’s usually no reason to worry about your 
character only having Superhuman Strength ⑩ in their 
cybernetic right arm unless the situation specifically talks 
about needing strength in the legs or the left arm.
FIONA
HSIEH


=== PAGE 194 ===
190 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
Depending on the nature of the power (sorcery, technol­
ogy, alien, etc.) the way the teleportation works can vary 
greatly. If the teleportation is through portals or worm­
holes, this might affect the SFX used in the power set.
Some characters may use this power to grab people and 
teleport them, either bringing them along as a passenger 
or making portals to send them away. This is represented 
best with SFX or by using the power with a stunt as part 
of an attack.
At the ⑩ and ⑫ rating, you can choose to have the power 
only allow travel to other dimensions or other worlds; 
travel between locations on Earth in such instances 
would be a stunt.
TRANSMUTATION
The character has the power to transmute one substance 
to another. Mystics call it alchemy, while to scientists it's 
known as matter alteration; the specific details may vary.
At ⑥, you can affect the integrity or cohesion of 
a target, causing it to soften or harden, perhaps 
degrade or take on other qualities, but not actually 
change into another substance.
At ⑧, you can alter the properties of the target to 
make it solid, liquid, or gas, or change it from one 
kind of solid, liquid, or gas to another within the same 
category, i.e., inorganic or organic.
At ⑩, you can operate on the chemical or elemental 
level and can change one substance, living or 
nonliving, into another. Stone can be made flesh, 
water can be transmuted into oil, and so on.
At ⑫, you can change any object into another, 
regardless of its original substance, shape, or
other qualities.
Transmutation is very powerful and, as such, typically 
doesn’t confer long-lasting effects. Most Transmutation 
tests or contests create assets or complications that repre­
sent the change in quality. The power can be used to inflict 
stress—such as a disintegrator ray—but unless the target 
is stressed out, the effect isn’t complete or permanent. The 
die rating of the power also typically informs how well it 
can alter a target that has Durability or Resistance.
Transmutation is often found in power sets with elemental 
control, Shapeshift, Stretch, or an attack power. A char­
acter’s ability to transmute or change themselves into 
different forms of matter is best represented by Shapeshift 
or powers like Durability or Strength, with the actual 
elemental change being descriptive.
STRETCH
The character can elongate or increase the length of their 
limbs or other body parts, often to great distances. This 
could be through prosthetic devices like tentacles, or it 
might be a metamorphic ability like having a rubbery or 
elastic body.
At ⑥, you can reach across a normal room or access 
high places. It’s the equivalent of having double the 
usual reach with arms or legs.
At ⑧, you can reach across a street, up the side of a 
building, or down an elevator shaft.
At ⑩, you can stretch to considerable distances, 
several city blocks away. You can clear buildings, 
rivers, or ravines with your elongated legs and arms.
At ⑫, you can reach ridiculous distances, perhaps 
without limit—across lakes, oceans, and even into 
orbit—although the further you stretch the less 
you’re able to make use of your limbs.
Stretch can be used like a movement power (long legs 
make travel easier), a defensive power (an elastic body 
can mitigate a bunch of damage), or an offensive power (a 
punch hurled across a street can hurt). While the way the 
power set is defined should inform how it’s used, Stretch 
is primarily a means of extending reach and access. 
Stretch is often coupled with powers like Durability, 
Intangibility (at low ratings), Grow, Strength, Reflexes, 
Shapeshift, and Elemental Control.
A power set with Stretch includes SFX like Area Attack, 
Grapple, and Versatility.
TELEPORT
The character may travel instantaneously from one point 
to another. Usually, no actual distance is traveled; the 
character just vanishes from one place and appears in 
another. The power rating defines teleport distance.
At ⑥, you can blink in and out of place in a single 
location, crossing a room or a gap between buildings, 
effectively eliminating the need to walk. Line of sight 
is usually required.
At ⑧, you can teleport across several miles, such 
as from place to place in a metropolitan area or, by 
taking multiple jumps, from one city to another.
At ⑩, you can travel around the world in single or 
multiple jumps, and perhaps as far as the moon.
At ⑫, you can travel across vast distances, even to 
other planets or galaxies.


=== PAGE 195 ===
191
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
POWER SFX
Here’s a list of thematically appropriate SFX to use with 
power sets or to adapt for distinctions. It’s a good idea to 
rename SFX for flavor; rather than Absorption you might 
have Reflective Constructs or Energy Channel.
These SFX use some mods described in other chapters, 
such as stress (page 39). You can switch out any mention 
of “stress” with “complication” or whichever variation of 
damage-tracking your Cortex Prime game uses.
ABSORPTION
If you succeed in a <type of attack> contest, instead of 
inflicting stress or a complication, convert your opponent’s 
effect die into a stunt asset for yourself or step up a power 
by one for your next roll. Spend a 
 to create this stunt 
asset if your opponent succeeds.
Usually included in a power set with some kind of Energy 
Control, Energy Blast, Strength, or Reflexes linked to the 
type of attack described in the SFX. This is an example 
of something that could be represented with a power 
trait but works best as SFX, e.g., Energy Absorption or
Kinetic Absorption.
AFFLICT
Add a ⑥ and step up your effect die by one when inflicting 
<type> complication on a target.
Usually appears in power sets that represent gear, grap­
pling, entangling, etc. The type of complication is usually 
connected to the power set.
AREA ATTACK
Spend a 
 to add a ⑥ and keep an additional effect die for 
each additional target past the first. 
Frequently included in power sets with Strength, Blast, 
or Control power traits.
Useful against mobs (similar opponents grouped together 
as a single threat). Rolling hitches when using Area 
Attack generally causes collateral damage, represented 
by complications.
AREA ATTACKS AND AREA EFFECTS 
Many attacks allow for a special kind of SFX called an area effect or 
area attack. At the cost of a 
, the benefit allows the character to 
add an additional  to the dice pool for each additional target. After 
the roll, when determining effect dice (stress, complications, etc.) an 
additional die may be chosen for every additional  that was added. 
Area effects are resisted individually by all targets, who roll to set or 
raise the difficulty against the attacking character’s single total. This 
SFX is especially useful against mobs (see page 117).
Adam’s superpowered agent in Mary Rose’s superspy game 
has an area effect SFX attached to his Quantum Belt power 
set. Adam’s defined this as an explosive effect that uses the 
Quantum Blast 
 power trait. In a contest with a Mob of 
Enemy Agents   , Adam can add up to   to his dice 
pool—one for each of the extra dice in the mob past the 
first—and keep three effect dice if he succeeds. The mob 
gets a single opposition dice pool to try to beat it.
If Adam was confronting three separate GMCs, Adam adds 
  to his dice pool and each of the GMCs gets their own 
opposition dice pool to avoid being affected by the SFX. 
Adam assigns each of his three effect dice to a different 
GMC. It’s possible to lose against one GMC and succeed 
against the other two, in which case only the effect dice 
assigned to the losing GMCs are applied.
CONFRONTING THE MOB
Adam spends a ●
Ⓟ to use his area effect Quantum Blast ⑧
against Mob of Enemy Agents ⑥⑥⑥.
CHARACTER
DICE POOL EFFECT
Adam’s Agent
add  
Mob of Enemy Agents    
only get a single pool
If Adam wins, he can apply up to three effect dice to the mob.
CONFRONTING THREE SEPARATE GMCS
Adam spends a ●
Ⓟ to use his area effect Quantum Blast ⑧
against three GMCs, rated ⑧, ⑧, and ⑥.
CHARACTER
DICE POOL EFFECT
Adam’s Agent
add  
GMC 1 ⑧, GMC 2 ⑧, GMC 3 
each GMC rolls their own 
opposition pool
Adam sets aside up to three effect dice. For each contest
he wins, he applies one of those effect dice.
BOOST
Shut down your highest rated <power set> power to step up 
another <power set> power by one. Activate an opportunity 
to restore the power.
Great for power sets that represent powered armor, cyber­
netics, or robotic systems.
BURST
Step up or double a power die against a single target. 
Remove the highest rolling die from your pool and add 3 
dice together for your total.
Usually appears in power sets that represent some kind 
of gear. Represents a concentrated effort, such as autofire 
or rapid attacks.
Burst represents a wide spread of attack such as covering 
fire or the attack ricocheting from one or more surfaces 
and thus around corners, obstacles, and so on.


=== PAGE 196 ===
192 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
CONSTRUCTS
Add a ⑥ and step up your effect die by one when using 
<power set> to create assets.
Usually included in power sets that represent summoning 
control over elements like earth or fire, etc. A variation is 
Grapple, which creates complications.
DANGEROUS
Add a ⑥ to your dice pool for an attack and step down the 
highest die in pool by one. Step up the effect die by one.
Included in power sets when representing some danger­
ous use of the character’s abilities, like claws or fangs.
FOCUS
If a pool includes a <power set> power, you may replace two 
dice of equal size with one die one step larger.
Great for heroes who have a lot of skills or whose power 
sets represent skill, training, or conditioning.
HEALING
Add <power> to your dice pool when helping others recover 
complications. Spend a 
 to recover your own or another’s 
<complication type> by one.
This might represent psychic healing, empathetic healing, 
chi healing, or spiritual aura.
IMMUNITY
Spend a 
 to ignore complications from <specific
attack type>.
Attack types include poisons, disease, psychic attack, 
magical attack, electricity, radiation, and so forth.
INVULNERABLE
Spend a 
 to ignore <type of complication> for a test or 
contest unless caused by <specific attack type>.
Similar to Immunity but restricted to a specific type of 
complication with an exception for a specific attack type. 
For example, Poisoned (except alcohol), Paralyzed (except 
magical paralysis).
MULTIPOWER
Use two or more <power set> powers in a single dice pool 
and step each power down by one for each additional power 
beyond the first.
Usually appears in power sets with several power traits 
and when the character has no other power sets. Only 
step down the power dice, not all the dice in the dice pool.
SECOND CHANCE
Spend a 
 to reroll when using any <power set> power.
Good for power sets that represent luck or fortitude.
SECOND WIND
Before you put together a dice pool including a <power set> 
power, you may give the GM a complication attached to 
you to re-assign as a complication at any time. Step up the 
<power set> power by one for this roll.
Almost always appears in a power set with the Stamina 
power trait. Variations might work with emotional or 
mental stress and be tied to a different power trait.
Tina’s Sage has the Second Wind SFX in Mary 
Rose’s superspy game. Her Sage has acquired 
Exhausted ⑧. When she confronts the villain
of the session, she gives the Exhausted ⑧ 
complication to Mary Rose and steps up the
power die she’s using in her dice pool against the 
villain. Mary Rose can re-assign the ⑧ complication 
as she likes once the contest is done, including
giving it to another player!
UNLEASHED
Step up or double any <power set> power for one roll.
If the roll fails, you gain a complication equal in size to
your power die.
Pairs well with power traits that are at the ⑧ or ⑩ rating. 
Represents a hero or villain who maintains strict control 
over his own powers and sometimes cuts loose.
VERSATILE
Split power trait die into two dice, stepped down by one; or 
three dice, stepped down by two.
Usually appears in power sets with power traits rated ⑩ 
or ⑫ and when the character has no other power sets. 
Splitting a ⑩ in this way gives you ⑧ ⑧ or ⑥⑥⑥. 
Splitting a ⑫ gives you ⑩ ⑩ or ⑧ ⑧ ⑧.
Dice that result from Versatile are each considered power 
trait dice for the purposes of other SFX that step up or step 
down the power.


=== PAGE 197 ===
POWER LIMITS
The primary purpose of limits in power sets is to repre­
sent vulnerabilities that let players acquire plot points in 
keeping with their character’s specific powers. A hero is 
nothing without their flaws and weaknesses, and most 
superheroes have an Achilles’ heel, even if it’s just that 
their powers wear them out!
Players aren’t the only people at the table who can activate 
a limit. The GM may also spend ●
Ⓟ to activate them in 
some circumstances. This doesn’t earn the player a ●
Ⓟ, so 
the option to activate a limit is always given to the player 
first. If the player decides not to, the option then goes to 
the GM, so it’s almost always beneficial to the player to 
take them up on it.
Each limit includes a description of how to restore a power 
that’s shut down by a limit.
CONSCIOUS ACTIVATION
If taken out, asleep, or unconscious, shut down <power set>. 
Restore <power set> when you awake.
This limit is common when the character’s powers stop 
working if the hero is unconscious, incoherent, or other­
wise taken out. It usually only applies to a specific type 
of stress, such as physical or emotional.
EXHAUSTED
Shut down any <power set specific> power to gain a 
. 
Activate an opportunity to restore the power.
This limit is straightforward. The character gets tired, 
and one of his powers stops working. Note that it isn’t the 
whole power set but only specific power traits.
GEAR
Shut down <power set> and gain a 
. Test to restore.
This limit represents a piece of equipment or another 
powered item that, if lost or stolen or knocked away, shuts 
down the character’s use of it. The power is restored by 
making a test to get the gear back, reset it, fix it, or other­
wise recover it. The GM sets the test’s difficulty based on 
the likelihood of getting it back.
GROWING DREAD
Both 1 and 2 on your dice count as hitches when using a 
<power set> power.
This is a good limit for mystical or very powerful heroes 
who make situations worse when they use their powers 
to their fullest extent. If the power set represents a pact 
with a demon, a dangerous power source, or something 
along those lines, this limit makes it clear that using those 
powers comes at a greater cost.
MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE
Shut down <power set A> to activate <power set B>.
Shut down <power set B> to restore <power set A>.
Use this limit when your use of one set of powers depends 
on another set of powers being inactive.
UNCONTROLLABLE
Change any <power set> power into a complication and gain 
a 
. Activate an opportunity or remove the complication to 
restore the power.
This limit represents powers that aren’t necessarily 
dangerous, but they’re unreliable or prone to causing 
immediate problems. When a power is turned into a 
complication through a limit like this, it can be targeted 
and recovered like any other complication. Eliminating 
the complication restores the power.
BURAK KIRK


=== PAGE 198 ===
194 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
All abilities in this chapter use this format:
ABILITY NAME
A short description and a suggestion of when to include 
the ability’s die in your dice pool.
Effect: All abilities fit into one of the six effect categories: 
Attack, Sensory, Movement, Control, Defense,
and Enhancement.
Descriptors: Ultimately, the players create the descriptors, 
but we provide some examples.
Limits: Again, these are just examples, and which limits apply 
depends on the circumstances and the descriptors. Feel free 
to create your own limits. Ability limits are almost always
“Earn a ●
Ⓟ when this ability is shut down.”
SFX: Players may choose from the list or create their own.
THE ABILITY LIST
It's true that this list overlaps a good bit with the Power 
List (page 182), but the Ability List has a more cinematic, 
prime time drama approach to superpowers and SFX. 
It’s not a good idea to mix the two; if you have superhe­
roes or aliens or fantasy monsters in your Cortex Prime 
game, they should all use powers, or all use abilities. See 
“Abilities” on page 66 for more details about this trait.
Depending on your method of creating characters, not all 
SFX attached to abilities come unlocked when the char­
acter is created. Usually each ability comes with one free 
SFX, and the rest can be unlocked later when you step 
up the die rating of your ability—one SFX at ⑧ and one 
SFX at ⑫. During growth, you can choose to add a new 
descriptor, and thus a new way to use your ability, rather 
than stepping up your ability’s die rating.
VANESSA MORALES
SFX THAT STEP DOWN EFFECT DICE
Many SFX in this section represent armor, damage reduction, or 
invulnerability to other abilities by stepping down an effect die, incoming 
stress, or complication. When you use the SFX, compare your effect die 
to the ability die being used against you.
•	 If your effect die is the same size or smaller than the ability die, 
step your opponent’s effect die down by one.
•	 If your effect die is a larger size than the ability die, ignore your 
opponent’s effect die completely.
EFFECT SYMBOLS
ATTACK
SENSORY
MOVEMENT
CONTROL
DEFENSE ENHANCEMENT


=== PAGE 199 ===
195
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
ABSORPTION
You can absorb a single kind of energy, whether 
directed at you or at characters in the same scene as you. 
Sometimes this energy can be stored and released later; 
sometimes it can be used to power your body to perform 
great feats. Include the ability in your dice pool when you 
absorb, release, or use energy.
Descriptors: Electricity, Heat, Radiation
Limits: Broken Concentration, Cold, Grounding
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to absorb energy to step down
your opponent’s energy-based effect die
against you or another character.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to absorb the energy out of an
attack on you or another character to create
an asset of the same die rating.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use absorbed energy to
perform feats of super-strength.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to release the energy you’ve
absorbed to power technology.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to release absorbed energy behind 
you, propelling you forward at great speed.
ADAPTATION
Your body is able to survive in, and may actually 
prefer, an environment that’s normally hostile or hazard­
ous to others. This can be as simple as thick, hairy skin 
to resist the effects of extreme cold temperatures, or as 
complicated as gills to allow you to breathe underwater. 
Some people with this ability can change their physiology 
to adapt to different environments, though it’s not usually 
an instantaneous process. Include the ability in your dice 
pool when you are fighting to overcome the elements or 
when your adaptation gives you an advantage.
Descriptors: Amphibious, Heat Shield, Modification
Limits: Dehydration, Cold, Heat, Vacuum
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to adapt your physiology to
new conditions.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to extend your adaptation to
other characters as long as you touch them.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to blend in to your
chosen environment.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reveal additional details
of your chosen environment.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to find useful resources
in your chosen environment.
ANIMAL CONTROL
You have some form of psychic link with a single 
species or type of animal. Sometimes this means being 
able to communicate with that type of animal or being 
“one of the pack.” You might form a close enough bond 
that one of these creatures is a constant companion, 
possibly bonded so strongly that you and the animal 
share each other’s pain and see through each other’s eyes. 
Include the ability die when you deal with your chosen 
animal or when one of your animal friends helps you.
Descriptors: Wolf, Cat, Fish
Limits: Eye Contact, Pain Transference, Psychic Feedback
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to see through an animal’s eyes
in another scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to see an animal’s recent memories.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to summon an animal that you
can control.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to take on features of your
chosen animal.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to take an animal out of the scene.
ANIMAL MIMICRY
Perhaps you have an unusual tie to the natural 
world, or your genetic structure slips back and forth on 
the evolutionary ladder. You can call upon the gifts and 
abilities of animals, gaining the speed of an antelope, the 
fantastic sense of smell of a bloodhound, or the jumping 
ability of a kangaroo. Include this ability’s die when you 
use the gifts of the natural world.
Descriptors: Primal Power, Genetics, Tribal Traditions
Limits: Concentration, Natural Enemies, Fire
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to mimic the natural abilities
of an animal.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to combine the natural abilities
of two animals to use in conjunction.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to grow claws to step up your
effect die on any physical attack.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to grow a thick hide to step down 
your opponent’s effect die from incoming attacks.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to retire in feline seclusion and 
recover your own stress or complications.


=== PAGE 200 ===
196 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
ASTRAL PROJECTION
You can leave your physical body behind and 
travel as a psychic entity or ghost. While in this form, your 
body is usually unconscious and defenseless, but your 
astral form is nearly invisible to normal detection and 
can walk through solid objects as if they weren’t there. 
Include the ability die when you invisibly eavesdrop, or 
in any contest with other astrally projected characters.
Descriptors: Psychic, Magic, Spirit 
Limits: Psychic Feedback, EMP, Tethered to Body
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to take another character
with you.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to disrupt electronics while
astrally projected.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to astrally project one body
part to see or touch the astral world.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to project “deeper” into
otherworldly spirit realms.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to take along the astral form of
a material object.
BLAST
Whether it’s primal forces like water, lava, and 
fire or energy sources such as light, heat, or electricity, the 
Blast ability covers a wide spectrum. When weaponized, 
these can be quite scary. This ability must be acquired 
multiple times if you want to project more than one kind 
of energy or element and should be renamed to suit, 
i.e., Radium Blast or Heat Blast. Include the ability die 
when you’re using your Blast to threaten, scare, or injure
an opponent.
Descriptors: Super-Breath, Fire, Water, Lava, Heat Ray, 
Electricity Blast, Shadow, Light
Limits: Heat, Ice, Rubber, Lead Shielding, Cold, Vacuum
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create an area effect.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to destroy an inanimate object as 
big as a car. Spend 2 ●
Ⓟ for an object as big as 
a house. Spend 3 ●
Ⓟ for an object as big as a 
skyscraper or a river.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make geysers of your element 
shoot up from the ground beneath your foes.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to encase a person or an object in 
ice for a scene with Ice Blast or Super-Breath 
Blast. Breaking free requires a test with your 
effect die added to the opponent’s difficulty
as a complication.
BODY TRANSFORMATION
You can change the molecular makeup of your 
body to change into another element. In most cases, you 
can only turn into one type of form, but there are rare 
individuals that can take on multiple forms. When in 
other forms, you take on the aspects of that form: metal­
lic forms are subject to magnetism, fiery forms can be 
doused with water, and gaseous forms are dispersed 
by high winds. Include the ability die when you use the 
aspects of your form to your advantage.
Descriptors: Steel Skin, Liquid Body, Gaseous Body
Limits: Corrosion, Heat, Wind
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to turn to a gaseous or liquid form 
and escape through a crack.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to become a rock-hard statue for a 
scene, ignoring physical stress or complications.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to turn another character into
your chosen element.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to turn yourself into living fire, adding 
the effect die to future hand-to-hand attacks.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to hide in a large amount of your 
chosen element.
CHI MASTERY
Through training and mastery, you’ve taught 
your body to respond to your conscious control. You can 
manipulate your own metabolic rate, sense other char­
acters and animals around you, and direct your life force 
into your every movement. Include this ability die when 
your body and your expert control of it come into play—
when you fight, run, or leap, and when you perceive the 
life force of others.
Descriptors: Discipline
Limits: Dark Chi, Sorcery, Distraction
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to channel your chi into a powerful 
blow, stepping up your effect die for this attack.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to recover your own stress or 
complications from injury or exhaustion.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to sense an incoming attack,
avoiding surprise.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to act in the darkness as if you
could see.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up or double a martial arts
or combat-based trait die for a test or contest.


=== PAGE 201 ===
197
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
CLAWS
With long claws, nails, or knives you slash and 
hack at your foes. It causes as much fear as it does blood 
and gore. You can include the ability die in your pool 
when trying to cause fear or bodily harm, as well as for 
other uses of your claws, such as climbing or wedging 
open blast doors.
Descriptors: Metal Nails, Energy Claws, Natural Talons 
Limits: Electricity, Magnetism, Terrifying
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up your effect die when 
inflicting stress or complications with your claws.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to rip apart solid, inert obstacles.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to stop your fall by using your
claws as pitons.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to regrow your claws if they are 
damaged or broken.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to cling to a surface with your
claws despite adverse conditions.
COMBUSTION
You create explosive charges that can detonate 
and cause damage commensurate to the size of the bomb. 
The larger the bomb, the bigger the blast. Given enough 
time and energy, you could blow up a building or possibly 
much, much more. Include the ability die when you use 
your bombs to destroy, threaten, or distract.
Descriptors: Explosion, Heat, Psychic
Limits: Time, Water, Vacuum
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to cause an explosive effect that 
inflicts stress or complications.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reveal that you left a bomb in
a location you were in earlier in the episode.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to draw everyone’s attention to
an explosion so you can escape a scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create shaped charges that can 
take down obstacles without damaging the 
surrounding structure.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a time bomb set to go
off after a certain amount of time has passed.
COMPREHENSION
You’re a savant, able to understand unusual 
languages and decipher impenetrable codes. Even if 
you’ve never seen or heard the language before in your 
life, or the ciphers are alien or otherwise impossible to 
understand, you have a handle on it. If it’s encoded in 
symbols, you can puzzle it out. Include the ability die 
when reading or deciphering strange languages or codes, 
or when using what you’ve learned.
Descriptors: Psychic, Networking, Intuition
Limits: Auditory, Visual, Time
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to instantly understand a spoken 
language you’ve never heard before.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to figure out alien technology well 
enough to use it…once.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to deduce the language or code’s 
origin in general terms.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to write or speak in response to
what you’ve deciphered.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to read binary code to reconstitute 
data files or understand a program’s function.
CRYOKINESIS
You control cold, ice, and all things related. You 
can draw moisture from the air to create structures of 
ice, or mess with the temperature of a room. Include the 
ability die when you drop the temperature, ice things 
over, or manipulate chunks of ice.
Descriptors: Ice, Cold, Frost
Limits: Heat, Sunlight, Passion
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to entomb another character in
ice, in a form of suspended animation.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create walls of ice to block
a path or pursuer.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to jam mechanical devices with
frost and ice.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to “skate” across ice.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to freeze a large mass of liquid
or even gas into a solid state.


=== PAGE 202 ===
198 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
DENSITY CONTROL
You can change the space between molecules in 
your body. In effect, you can walk through walls, become 
hard as stone, or both. Include the ability die whenever 
your altered density benefits you.
Descriptors: Phasing, Hardening, Intangibility
Limits: Electricity, Water, Wind
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to walk through a wall.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to become hard as stone and step 
down your opponent’s effect die when they’re 
trying to harm you.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reach into another character’s 
body—as an attack or as medical attention.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to decrease your density.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make your fists super-dense and 
step up your effect die when smashing somebody.
DREAM MANIPULATION
Entering people’s dreams is a tricky thing. You 
get to know parts of them they keep hidden. For you, it’s 
an art. You must see the sleeper to enter their dreams. 
Once inside, you aren’t subject to the rules of the dream. 
You can control elements within the dream and leave 
when you choose to do so. Include the ability die when­
ever you’re within a dream, whether you are mining for 
information, inflicting harm through nightmares, or 
soothing the subject’s fears.
Descriptors: Psychic, Magic, Memory
Limits: Psychic Feedback, Strong Emotion, Dreams About You
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to bring other characters into
a dreamscape with you.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create an item, location,
or event within a dream.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to force a dream to recall a
memory of the dreamer.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make the dreamer sleepwalk.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to enter the dreams of a
comatose dreamer.
DUPLICATION
There are more than one of you. Perhaps there 
are an infinite number of you; perhaps you can make 
more yous when you wish. By default, only one of you has 
your abilities. Each of your duplicates has its own stress 
or complication tracks. Include the ability die when you 
gang up on another character, work “together” with your­
self, or when being in two or more places benefits you.
Descriptors: Holographic Copy, Clones, Magic
Limits: Psychic Feedback, Pain Transference, Split Attention
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a duplicate with one of your 
abilities, stepped down by one. Spend additional 
●
Ⓟ to give your duplicate additional abilities.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to stash a duplicate in a
convenient place you’ve been in before.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to merge two duplicates
together, sharing memories.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to “share” stress or complications 
across duplicates, stepping down the die rating
by one for each shared dupe.
EARTH CONTROL
You can control the very ground beneath your 
feet, bending it to your will. Include the ability die when 
you create earthquakes, volcanic vents, or other tectonic 
disturbances, or when you mold stone or sand to trap your 
foes or shield your friends. 
Descriptors: Seismic Manipulation, Lava Control,
Glass Manipulation
Limits: Must be Grounded, Cold, Water
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to encase another character
in stone.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a sweeping effect of
quakes that inflict stress or complications.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to raise a barrier of stone before
you, stepping down your opponent’s effect die.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to seal a corridor with a wall
of stone.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make the earth swallow up a 
vehicle, a building, or a whole town.
EFFECT SYMBOLS
ATTACK
SENSORY
MOVEMENT
CONTROL
DEFENSE ENHANCEMENT


=== PAGE 203 ===
199
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
ELECTROKINESIS
Electricity, whether man-made or naturally 
occurring, is your plaything. You might create the elec­
tricity yourself or need to have an external source, but 
the end result is the same. Include the ability die when 
you create a spark of electricity, override some electrical 
device, or disperse the power in an electrical cable.
Descriptors: Electricity, Lightning, Magic
Limits: Grounding, Rubber, Conductive Materials
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a powerful storm.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to channel lightning to a point
on the ground.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to charge your body or conductive 
material with electricity to be released later.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to activate electronic devices
using your electrical abilities.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create an electromagnetic pulse
to disable all electronic devices within a scene.
ENERGY AURA
A swirl of flame, a looming patina of decay, or a 
shining halo—whatever form it takes, you’re surrounded 
by an aura of energy. It protects you and repels your oppo­
nents through force or violence or perhaps sheer nausea. 
Include this ability die when your aura protects you or 
when you extend it out into the world around you.
Descriptors: Fire, Radiation, Holy Light
Limits: Water, Corruption, Concentration
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use your aura to envelop another 
PC or GMC who’s in the same scene as you.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step down an opponent’s effect
die from an incoming physical or energy attack.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to cause feedback and interference 
with electronics in your presence.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to set flammable objects on fire.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up your own effect die
when making a close-combat attack.
FLIGHT
You can defy the pull of gravity and soar through 
the skies, no need for an aircraft. You may use wings, gusts 
of wind, or anti-gravity, or just have the superpower to 
defy humanity’s evolutionary misfortune of being a land-
bound mammal. Roll this ability’s die when performing 
evasive maneuvers in mid-flight, chasing down another 
flying opponent, or getting a bird’s eye view of a situation.
Descriptors: Wings, Gliding, Levitation
Limits: Short Distances, Sonic Boom, Wind
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to carry something large or
ungainly along with you.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to support a falling object such
as a floundering aircraft.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to dive bomb an enemy and
step up your effect die for this attack.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to change direction quickly to fly 
around an obstacle; you may use this obstacle
as a ⑧ stunt or asset.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to join a scene you aren’t part of, 
even if you can’t get there by ground.
FORCE CONSTRUCTS
You have the ability to create objects out of sheer 
energy. Whether you build towers to the sky, wrap chains 
around your enemies, or create a parachute when you fall 
out of an airplane, your constructs last just long enough 
to be of use and then disappear into nothing. Include 
this ability die when using your force constructs as tools, 
obstacles, or any other clever thing you think up. 
Descriptors: Hypertech, Magic, Psychic
Limits: Specific Substance, Concentration, Line of Sight
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a wall of force that prevents 
another character from escaping a scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a net of force that catches
a large, falling object.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to dispel a force construct made
by another character.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a force construct inside
a machine that causes it to malfunction.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a path through the air
that you can run along.


=== PAGE 204 ===
200 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
NOÉ LEYVA


=== PAGE 205 ===
201
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
FORCE FIELD
You can create a barrier made of energy or force. 
It might be a visible energy field or an invisible bubble. It 
can protect you and your friends, or trap your foes while 
you determine their fate. Roll the ability die when you use 
your force field to help you in conflicts or emergencies.
Descriptors: Energy Shield, Telekinetic Field, Electric Shield
Limits: Psychic Feedback, Mental, Concentration
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step down stress or complications 
imposed on all characters within the force field.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to entrap another character in a
force field.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to fly short distances within a
force bubble.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to slip from the grasp of an
adversary by sliding out of your force field.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to keep all forms of gas in or out 
of the force field; this can provide a bubble of 
breathable air in an airless environment or
keep harmful gases in or out.
GRAVITY CONTROL
You can manipulate the pull of Earth’s gravity on 
yourself or another person or object. Increasing the pull 
of gravity can make the subject so heavy it can’t move; 
decreasing the pull of gravity can make the subject light 
enough to fly. Include this ability die when manipulating 
weight could affect the outcome.
Descriptors: Gravity, Magic, Centrifugal Force
Limits: Concentration, Density, Magnetism
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to hold another character or
object in place with powerful gravity.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to fly short distances or hover
in place.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to toss another character out
of a scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make a character or object
so light that it can float in the breeze.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to increase the gravity in a scene;
you may use the crushing gravity as a ⑧ stunt
for the remainder of the scene.
HEALING
You can heal physical or mental trauma inflicted 
on others, sometimes with just a touch. Curing wounds—
stress or complications, depending on your mods—might 
end with you getting the stress in place of the injured 
character. Roll this ability’s die in any situation that calls 
upon your restorative talents.
Descriptors: Physical Healing, Mental Healing, Repair
Limits: Emotional Trigger, Damage Transfer, Touch
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to recover another character’s
stress or complications that relate to being 
anxious or angry.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to recover another character’s
stress or complications relating to being
afraid or shocked.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to stave off a disease or similar 
affliction for a short period of time.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to identify any poison or toxin
in your subject’s body.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to remove another character’s 
physical stress or complication and add it
to yourself.
HYDROKINESIS
You have complete control over water, ice, and 
steam, allowing you to move water as if with telekinesis 
and to create structures like walls or orbs of water. Roll 
this ability’s die in tests or contests involving water or 
aqueous liquids.
Descriptors: Water, Ice, Steam
Limits: Cold, Heat, Sand
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a small storm or thick fog 
within a scene; you may use this as a ⑧ stunt.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create bubbles of air to allow 
others to survive underwater.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create huge tidal waves.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to turn any large body of water,
such as a lake, into steam or ice or vice-versa.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a wall of water that moves 
to act as a shield for you or an ally, and step down 
the effect die of the appropriate opponent. 


=== PAGE 206 ===
202 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
ILLUSIONS
You can create images that others can see and 
hear, and which seem very real. Roll this ability’s die when 
you’re trying to pull the wool over somebody’s eyes, trick 
them with some sleight of hand, or create misdirection.
Descriptors: Mental, Magic, Visual
Limits: Psychic Feedback, Concentration, One Target 
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create illusions so real that
another character thinks they can be seen,
heard, smelled, and even touched.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create illusions that appear
for all characters in a scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create an illusion of a scene, 
changing the surroundings.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create an illusion pleasing
enough to step down the effect die of any 
incoming fear or sadness-based attack.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create an illusion scary
enough to step up the effect die of any fear
or terror attack.
INSECT CONTROL
You can communicate with and control insects, 
usually of a single type. In some circumstances, you might 
be seen as a hive or a queen by the insects; in others it’s 
simply a form of mind control. Regardless, the connection 
can have side effects such as transference of pain as well 
as seeing through the eyes of the insects, which could get 
quite confusing. Include your ability’s die when the situa­
tion involves insects or could be improved by controlling 
insects in the area.
Descriptors: Bees, Locusts, Ants
Limits: Pain Transference, Psychic Feedback, Bug Spray
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to see through the eyes of an
insect in another scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to swarm insects on another 
character for a scene. Any other character
can use the swarm as a ⑧ stunt.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to take on aspects of the insects
that you control.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to call insects of the type you
control to come to you.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to direct insects to infest large 
electronic or mechanical devices in the scene
to disrupt them and render them inoperable.
INVISIBILITY
You can disappear from view at will. This might 
be a result of a mass telepathy convincing others you’re 
not there, you might simply turn transparent, or you might 
refract light around you, so others see what’s behind you 
instead of you. If vanishing from sight would help you in 
a test or contest, include the ability’s die.
Descriptors: Perception, Blending, Magical
Limits: Mental, Scent, Audible
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to disappear, escaping from
the scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to hide for an entire scene to
listen in without being noticed.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to shadow someone for a whole
day without them noticing you at all.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to see other invisible people
or objects.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to turn another person or
object invisible for a scene.
INVULNERABILITY
You are able to avoid pain and trauma. This might 
be because you’re simply tough and hardened, or your 
body might be rubbery or liquid and thus impossible to 
hurt. Include this ability whenever you’re engaged in a 
struggle to resist or oppose physical attacks, showing off 
your impenetrable skin, or ignoring hostile conditions to 
achieve some goal.
Descriptors: Mental, Physical, Magic
Limits: Energy, Electricity, Magic
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step down an opponent’s
effect die.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to recover your stress or 
complications relating to injury or exhaustion.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to ignore the effects of exposure to 
extreme temperatures such as arctic cold
or volcanic cores.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to ignore hunger or exhaustion
due to lack of sleep.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to ignore the need to breathe in
an airless environment such as underwater. 
EFFECT SYMBOLS
ATTACK
SENSORY
MOVEMENT
CONTROL
DEFENSE ENHANCEMENT


=== PAGE 207 ===
203
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
LIGHT CONTROL
You can control light, using it to blind or daze 
or light up a dark room without a flashlight. Include this 
ability’s die when making attacks with light, revealing 
things with light, or making the ambient light improve the 
way you look to others, or when you’re trying to perform 
well in an overly bright or dark environment.
Descriptors: Light, Laser, Flash
Limits: Shadow, Diffusion, Mirror
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a dazzling blast,
temporarily blinding everyone in a scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a dizzying light show, 
hypnotizing anyone that can see the lights.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use a focused light beam to
burn through an inanimate object or burn a 
message onto a surface.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to shine brightly into the ultraviolet 
spectrum, imitating sunlight.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create holographic shapes from 
light that can remain for an entire scene.
LUCK
Things have a tendency to go your way, whether 
this is a conscious decision or not. There are people 
with the opposite ability to cause bad luck to happen to 
other people. They are not fun to be around. Include this 
ability die in any roll that hinges almost entirely on luck 
or chance, rather than skill or effort.
Descriptors: Luck, Jinx, Magic
Limits: Mental, Emotional Trigger, Magic
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reroll a die in a test or contest
that includes a hitch (you can reroll the hitch).
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to force your opponent to reroll
the highest die in a test or contest.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to allow another PC or major
GMC to reroll a die in a test or contest that 
includes a hitch (they can’t reroll the hitch).
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to chance upon a clue when you 
aren’t looking for it.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step down an effect die that
would obviously cause you harm.
MAGNETISM
You can affect not only the massive magnetic 
powers of the planet, but the minuscule magnetic prop­
erties in every piece of metal, allowing you to create walls 
of metal to defend yourself or perhaps even slow the blood 
in a human body due to the iron content. Roll this abili­
ty’s die when a situation’s outcome might be affected by 
magnetic forces.
Descriptors: Magnetism
Limits: Electricity, Plastics, Concentration
SFX:
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to wrap metal around a
character, trapping them.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to wipe computer data storage
and memory banks.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to scramble electronic devices
for the remainder of the scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to manipulate the iron in the
blood of another person to stun them or
cause stress or complications. 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to move big metallic objects around 
as defined by the scope of your die rating:
④: office chair	
⑩: truck
⑥: refrigerator	
⑫: jumbo jet
⑧: small car
METAHUMAN SENSE
You can identify those with power like your 
own. That information may come to you through a sixth 
sense or be a variation of your other senses like sight or 
smell. By default, you detect metahumans like yourself: if 
you’re meteor-infected, you can only detect other meteor-
infected metahumans. Include this ability die when you 
find other metahumans or when you use that information 
to your benefit.
Descriptors: Perception, Insight, Experience
Limits: Line of Sight, Lead, Time/Focus
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to get a vague sense of a metahuman’s 
abilities—usually their descriptors or limits.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to identify power sources beyond 
your own.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to identify a target’s limit.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to identify any existing assets, 
complications, or stunts the abilities are
linked to.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to “tag” a metahuman so that
you can track their location for a day.


=== PAGE 208 ===
204 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
MIND CONTROL
You can control or influence other people’s minds 
without them realizing, although it’s hard to make them 
go against their deepest beliefs. You might use psychic 
influence, or pheromones, or subsonic vibrations. Include 
the ability die when trying to coerce, seduce, influence, or 
mislead someone. Mind control works best when you’re 
in the same scene; its effects may be overcome in later 
scenes by a test, especially when your influence conflicts 
with the subject’s true convictions.
Descriptors: Mental, Magic, Pheromones, Tech Implant
Limits: Psychic Feedback, Eye Contact, Auditory
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to insert a post-hypnotic suggestion 
in your target to be acted upon later.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to erase a memory, such as a
secret identity.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to insert false memories into a target.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make a target into your stalwart 
defender without having to maintain control
over every action.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make a target oppose his
friends without having to maintain control
over every action.
PARALYSIS
You can lock someone in place, incapable of 
moving or doing anything physical. This could be due to 
some sort of ray or beam, perhaps some kind of mental 
control, or a poison that causes paralysis on contact.
Roll this ability’s die when immobilizing someone—
whether to terrorize them or escape from them—would 
be to your advantage.
Descriptors: Mental, Poison, Stun
Limits: Psychic Feedback, Touch, Duration
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make another character
unable to move, speak, or act.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to release a paralyzing agent that 
slows everyone in a scene except you. You may 
use this as a ⑧ stunt.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to stun a target from a distance
so that they can no longer run away.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make a target fall asleep.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up your effect die when 
causing fear, anger, or injury-based stress
or complications. 
PLANT CONTROL
You can command plant life to grow or wither at 
will, to wind around your enemies, and to communicate 
with you as if it were another person. Roll this ability’s die 
when the plant life around you could help you achieve 
your goals.
Descriptors: Tree, Spore, Fungus
Limits: Pain Transference, Psychic Feedback, Cold
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make vines burst from below, 
binding a character to the ground. Anyone but
the target may use the vines as a ⑧ stunt for
the rest of the scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to send messages through plant
life in scenes you’re not in.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to grow a large plant pod to
escape a scene through the ground.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to ask plant life in the scene for 
residual memories.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to cause plants in a scene with
you to secrete toxins. You may use the toxins
as a ⑧ stunt.
POISON
Your touch or scent can destroy the inner work­
ings of the human body. This may involve breathing in 
your released vapors, venomous injection, or a simple 
kiss. Include this ability’s die when trying to overcome 
someone with your toxic or chemical talents.
Descriptors: Gaseous, Kiss, Injection
Limits: Touch, Wind, Water
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make your poisonous gas
affect everyone in a scene as an area effect.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to infect a target with a poison
that activates one or more scenes later.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to conceal the toxin from normal 
medical science.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to recover yourself or somebody in 
the same scene from any stress caused by a toxin.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up your effect die when
you’re trying to cause harm with your poison.
Note: Please read the note on Mind Control, 
Possession, and Consent on page 186.


=== PAGE 209 ===
205
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
POSSESSION
You can inhabit another’s body for a short 
time. Often the victims of this kind of control have no 
memory of the event. Include this ability’s die when 
you’re possessing someone and want to hide your 
possession, convince people your host is still in charge, 
or engage in psychic warfare with the mind of the host.
Possession includes a few special rules. When you possess 
someone, you use your own mental traits, but you may 
use your host’s physical traits where appropriate. If you 
attempt a test or contest while in your host’s body in which 
their highest mental trait die rating is higher than your 
own, they may attempt to shake your control by spending 
a ●
Ⓟ and interfering with their own roll. If they roll higher 
than you, the possession is ended. Possession for more 
than a single contest or test requires a contest 
against the target in addition to the ●
Ⓟ spent; 
if you succeed, you step in and act while the PC 
or GMC takes a back seat.
Descriptors: Mental, Magic, Spirit
Limits: Psychic Feedback, Duration, Concentration
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to seize control of a minor GMC
in the same scene as you for the rest of this 
episode, or until they break free of your control.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to control all minor GMCs in a scene. 
Rather than inhabiting everyone’s body, you 
are merely in the back of their minds, making 
suggestions that everyone seems to agree are 
good ideas. The effects only last for this scene. 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use someone else’s SFX for
the rest of the scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to take control of a PC or GMC in 
another scene for a single contest or test. 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to take control of a PC or GMC
for the remainder of the scene or until they
break free. This also requires a contest
against the target.
POWER LEECH
You’re the bane of the powered community, 
existing to either imitate other abilities or temporarily 
take them away. You roll this ability’s die when facing 
down someone else with abilities or when trying to 
control stolen abilities. To actually take abilities away, 
you must use SFX.
Descriptors: Alien Mineral, Power, Magic
Limits: Uncontrollable, Touch, Concentration
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to gain an ability of another PC
or GMC in the same scene. The die rating
of the stolen ability is the lower of your
Power Leech die rating and the stolen ability’s 
original die rating.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to shut down an ability of another
PC or GMC in the same scene. Your die rating 
must be equal to or greater than their ability’s
die rating.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use an SFX from gear in the
same scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ and step this ability down by one
to step down all abilities other than your own
in the same scene as you by one.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up another ability of yours
by stepping down an opponent’s ability.
Note: Please read the note on Mind Control, 
Possession, and Consent on page 186.
COUPLE OF KOOKS


=== PAGE 210 ===
206 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
PRECOGNITION
You see things before they happen. Sometimes 
only seconds before; sometimes far, far ahead. This power 
doesn’t mean you can automatically understand the 
context of what you’re seeing; it simply means that you 
see something that’s coming. Roll this ability’s die when 
trying to solve a problem, understand information, or get 
insight into something using your precognitive ability.
Descriptors: Mental, Magic, Touch
Limits: Traumatic Flashes, Psychic Feedback, Uncontrollable
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to sense an opponent’s next
move in a fight. Remove the highest rolling
die from their next roll.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to learn about an object or
person’s future just by touching them.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to act on your precognitive abilities; 
reroll your entire pool, minus any hitches.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to have gained a precognitive clue 
that leads you to a scene you aren’t part of.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to have left a clue or message in a 
scene you aren’t part of but have visited before.
PYROKINESIS
Your control over fire and heat lets you manipu­
late temperature as well as flame. You might create your 
own flame or require something else to make the flame for 
you, but the end result is the same. Add this ability’s die 
when handling fire, impressing others with your grilling 
techniques, or sensing heat sources in your area.
Descriptors: Fire, Heat, Temperature 
Limits: Water, Cold, Vacuum
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to melt an inanimate object with a 
scope defined by your die rating:
REGENERATION
You are able to heal physical or mental stress and 
trauma you’ve been subjected to. Include your ability die 
when your regenerative ability would let you successfully 
struggle through painful or harmful situations.
Descriptors: Physical, Mental, Magical
Limits: Emotional Block, Elemental Trigger, Vampirism
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to recover stress or complications 
caused by injury or fatigue.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to recover stress or complications 
caused by fear or anxiety.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to grow back a severed limb or
other body part.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to cure yourself from any ailment
or disease.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to return from the dead. You must 
step this ability down a step as a consequence.
SHADOW CONTROL
A creature of shadow, you can create shadows 
where there are none and cause existing shadows to 
do your bidding. Include this ability die when shifting 
shadows around, drawing them closer, or dispersing them 
would help you achieve your goals.
Descriptors: Shadow, Magic, Darkness
Limits: Light, Fire, UV Light (including Sunlight)
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to turn someone else into
a shadow.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to restrain another character
with their own shadow.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to attack someone with their
own shadow.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to envelop an entire scene in 
darkness, snuffing out all light.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to temporarily blind everyone
in a scene by covering their eyes in their
own shadows.
EFFECT SYMBOLS
ATTACK
SENSORY
MOVEMENT
CONTROL
DEFENSE ENHANCEMENT
④: ice cubes	
⑩: steel bars
⑥: frozen pond 	 ⑫: vault door
⑧: gold brick
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a ring of fire, trapping 
another character.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to absorb existing fire and heat 
into your own body.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to surround yourself with flames
and step up your effect die when making
a burn attack.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a wall of flame to step
down a damage-causing effect die from
physical attacks.


=== PAGE 211 ===
207
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
SHADOW WALK
You can dive into shadows or move as a shadow 
to get from place to place. Include this ability in any test 
or contest where your unique talent at moving in and 
through local shadows would be an advantage.
Descriptors: Shadow, Magic, Darkness
Limits: Light, Fire, UV Light (including Sunlight)
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to slip into holes and cracks too
small for pursuers to follow.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to jump into one shadow and out
of another.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to spread a shadow across a scene
to jump in one end and out the other.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to jump into another person’s
shadow and jump out of the same person’s 
shadow at a later point in time.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to jump into a shadow on a flat 
surface like a wall and out on the other side
of the surface as if the shadow was a doorway
or portal.
SHAPESHIFTING
You can alter your appearance or shape to imitate 
other people, creatures, or inanimate objects. Include this 
ability’s die when you’re trying to pass off your assumed 
shape or appearance as your own, engaged in a fight 
where changing shape might help you out, or retaining 
your shape while fatigued or hurt. If you’ve been taken 
out, you might return to your native form unless you 
spend a ●
Ⓟ to keep it stable.
Descriptors: Imitation, Animal, Object 
Limits: Concentration, Scent, X-Rays
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to change shape into an object
the same size as yourself.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to imitate another character
down to fingerprints and retinal patterns.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to grow in size to two or three
times your normal height.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to shrink to miniscule size.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to change into an animal that
would be indistinguishable from the real
thing at a genetic level.
SIZE ALTERATION
Six feet tall? A demure five four, perhaps? How 
about twenty feet toes to nose or a mere six inches? You 
can drastically grow and shrink your body size. Contrast 
this with Shapeshifting, which is about fooling other char­
acters: nobody will be fooled by a twenty-foot-tall you. 
Include this ability die when your shifting size plays to 
your advantage—towering over others, shrinking down 
to slip through small crevices, or simply parlaying your 
size advantage.
Descriptors: Strange Biology, Physics, Wishes
Limits: Insecurity, Concentration, Air
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to grow toward terrifying 
proportions, stepping up your effect die
when trying to intimidate or exert force
on something.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to be so tiny you’re not detected.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to grow so big you destroy the 
building you’re in.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to shrink and escape any bonds
that are constraining you.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to grow into the way of an attack 
against another character, interfering with
a contest.
SONIC BLAST
You can let loose a cacophony of noise that could 
take out a city block. Include this ability die when you’re 
using your sonic attack to harm someone, freak them out, 
or break a lot of glass.
Descriptors: Sonic Scream, Music, High Frequency
Limits: Silence, Requires Vocals, White Noise
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to affect everyone in a scene who 
can hear you. Treat this as an area effect test, one 
that all affected characters in the scene must test 
against to avoid taking stress or complications 
related to hearing injury or vibration damage.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to emit a low frequency scream and 
cause a localized earthquake.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to emit a high frequency scream that 
scrambles electronics in a scene and calls to all 
nearby canines.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to emit a scream of the exact 
frequency required to shatter a specific glass 
object in the same scene as you.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to emit a scream of such force that it 
deteriorates concrete and other materials back to 
its rocky and sandy origins.


=== PAGE 212 ===
208 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
STRETCHING
You can bend and twist into nearly any shape, 
becoming both like liquid and stretching far beyond 
human reach. Include this ability’s die when your elastic 
or rubbery nature would help you get a positive outcome.
Descriptors: Plastic, Rubber, Putty
Limits: Electricity, Cold, Heat
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to force yourself through narrow 
spaces including pipes and cracks.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to stretch long distances to reach 
great heights.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to stretch in all directions like a
net in order to catch a falling object or person.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to change your appearance in
minor ways to hide your identity.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step down your opponent’s
effect die from physical attacks against you.
SUMMONING
Whether they come from the luminiferous ether, 
another plane of existence, or are conjured up from your 
own imagination, you can summon forth all manner of 
creatures. They assist you, defend you, fight for you, and 
perform tasks for you. Include this ability when your
creatures assist or defend you or when you use their 
powers as your own. 
Descriptors: Magic
Limits: Magic
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to summon a creature, which
serves as a ⑧ ⑧ extra. This creature
disappears once it reaches zero dice.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to boost a summoned extra’s
die rating.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to grant a summoned creature
an ability appropriate to its nature.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to banish a creature summoned
by you or another summoner.
SUPER-SENSES
Your senses are broader and keener than any 
mortal’s should be. You may have superhuman versions 
of your five senses, or senses outside of the human spec­
trum. Start with one Super-Sense descriptor at ④ and add 
a new one every time you step the rating up or add a new 
SFX—yes, adding descriptors to Super-Senses is easier 
than most abilities. Include this ability’s die when using 
your super-senses to help you stay alert, aware, or aid you 
in perceiving things in your immediate environment.
Descriptors: Super-Hearing, Telescopic Sight, X-Ray Vision, 
Infrared Vision, Radar
Limits: Lead, Overload, Interference, Magic
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to see through objects.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to hear or see into a nearby scene 
you’re not in.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to get the scent of any person or 
object and track the scent to its source.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to see microscopic details beyond 
what’s possible with an electron microscope.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to see in all directions at once.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to hear signals along the radio band 
or see beyond the electromagnetic spectrum.


=== PAGE 213 ===
209
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
SUPER-SPEED
You can move so fast you’re rarely seen as more 
than a colored blur. Include this ability die whenever 
your ability to move quickly might directly help you 
out, whether it’s to get something done faster or to cover 
more distance. When dealing with someone else with 
Super-Speed, you can spend a ●
Ⓟ to keep pace with them 
or counter their Super-Speed effects; this turns it into
a contest.
Descriptors: Quickness, Kinetic, Hypersonic
Limits: Unstoppable, Sonic Boom, Out of Touch
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to join a scene or switch to a new 
scene regardless of distance.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to run so fast you run up a
vertical surface.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to perform multiple activities in the 
time it takes others to perform a single activity.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to run fast enough to cross water
as if it were solid ground.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to zip around an obstacle during a 
chase; you may use this obstacle as a ⑧ stunt 
against your pursuer.
SUPER-STRENGTH
You’re capable of staggering feats of superhu­
man strength, even if you don’t look all that muscular. 
Include this ability die when your amazing strength 
would directly help you succeed. When facing another 
character with Super-Strength, you may spend a ●
Ⓟ to 
counter an SFX they use against you; this makes it into 
a contest.
Descriptors: Muscles, Tactile Telekinesis, Size
Limits: Uncontrollable, Anger Trigger, Needs Focus
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to perform a fantastic feat
of strength.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to throw or knock another
character out of a scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to pound on the ground, creating
a shockwave that knocks over everyone in
the scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to break through a wall—even a
brick or stone wall—to grab a target or object
on the other side.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to wield a large inanimate object, like 
an automobile, as a weapon (and as a ⑧ stunt).
TEN TEN STUDIOS


=== PAGE 214 ===
210 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
SWIMMING
You can move through the water at great speeds, 
more like a dolphin or shark than a human. Usually this 
ability includes an adaptation for surviving underwater, 
making it possible for you to sustain those speeds deep 
underwater without coming up for air. If you don’t want 
this to come with underwater breathing, add that as a 
limit. Add this ability’s die into any roll that involves 
aquatic activity or movement.
Descriptors: Swimming, Water, Fins
Limits: Dehydration, Ice, Earth, Not Amphibious
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to move through water at high 
speeds—join another scene regardless of
distance if it’s accessible by water.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to escape a scene by jumping
into a nearby body of water and disappearing
into the depths.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to leap from the water onto a
nearby shore, boat, or low flying aircraft to 
surprise your foes.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to resist the pressure of very deep 
water without a pressure suit or submarine.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step down any incoming stress
or complications while you’re in the water by 
dodging around your opponent.
TECHNOPATHY
You can control technology remotely with your 
mind, accessing even unfriendly devices as if they were 
your home computer. Include this ability die when you 
interact with computers and technology.
Descriptors: Mechanical, Mental, Computer, Electronic
Limits: Electricity, Psychic Feedback, Magnetism
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to break through a computer
system’s firewall.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to control any electronic device 
n the same scene as you; you may use this
device as a ⑧ stunt for the rest of the scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to turn on and control vehicles
as if you’re physically driving them.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to see through the “eyes” of 
electronic devices in scenes other than
your own.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to override security codes on
door panels or electronic vaults.
TELEKINESIS
You can levitate and move people, objects, even 
yourself with your mind. Telekinetics can usually main­
tain flight and create shields to stave off physical trauma. 
With this ability you may be able to create telekinetic bolts 
to damage an enemy or throw another person aside like 
a rag doll. Include this ability die whenever you’re using 
your mind to help you manipulate something.
Descriptors: Mental, Magic, Spirit
Limits: Psychic Feedback, Concentration, Emotion Trigger
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to knock a character out of a scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a telekinetic shield
to step down the effect die of an incoming
physical attack.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to push, pull, or lift something
really heavy.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to fly or levitate a short distance. 
Spend another ●
Ⓟ if you want to carry others
with you.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to shoot bolts of telekinetic force.
TELEPATHY
You can access the mind of others, conveying 
messages or reading thoughts and memories. Include 
this ability die when you’re using telepathy to help you 
communicate with others, get a read on somebody, or 
sense the presence of stray thoughts in a room.
Descriptors: Mental, Magic, Spirit
Limits: Psychic Feedback, Concentration, Eye-contact
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to read another character’s
surface thoughts.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to send messages psychically to
a character in a different scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a mental shield to block 
other mental powers from invading your mind.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to sense the location and well-being 
of any one person that you’ve met before.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to attack another person with a 
mental blast.
EFFECT SYMBOLS
ATTACK
SENSORY
MOVEMENT
CONTROL
DEFENSE ENHANCEMENT


=== PAGE 215 ===
211
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
TELEPORTATION
You can move from one place to another without 
moving at all. You might open a large portal like a doorway 
from one place to another place miles away, or you might 
just blink out of existence and re-appear someplace else. 
Some dissolve into glowing light, then reform with a 
similar light show somewhere far away. You can roll this 
ability’s die into tests and contests where teleporting and 
jaunting around might directly affect the outcome.
Descriptors: Portal, Magic, Mental
Limits: Concentration, Slow, Mental
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to join a scene or switch to a new 
scene regardless of distance.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to quickly teleport away to escape 
from a scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to take another character with you.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a small portal capable of 
teleporting objects.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a portal that alters your 
falling trajectory, landing safely or off to the side.
TIME CONTROL
You can manipulate the flow of time around you, 
slowing or speeding it up to suit your needs. It’s said that 
some with this ability can use it to reverse time in short 
bursts, but that might only be a rumor. Roll this ability’s 
die if tweaking the flow of time would directly influence 
a test or contest’s result.
Descriptors: Time, Age, Magic
Limits: Time, Concentration, Psychic Feedback
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to stop time for up to ten
subjective minutes.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to slow time around you, allowing
you to switch to a new scene instantly.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to stop time for five subjective 
minutes but bring another person with you.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reverse time for a few seconds
to change one error, allowing you to reroll
your last dice roll—however, you must keep
the second roll.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to slow time so you can perform 
multiple activities in the time it takes others to 
perform one; treat this as an area effect, with 
a maximum number of added ⑥ equal to the 
number of steps above ④ in this ability to
create assets, complications, or stress.
TIME TRAVEL
Yesterday, today, tomorrow—these are all open to 
you as destinations. You can travel through time. Whether 
you disappear now and appear then or hit some sort of 
cosmic rewind or fast forward button, the result is the 
same. When you travel through time, you remain in the 
same place relative to the Earth; if you travel from 2020 
Quebec to 1400, you’ll meet some Algonquins. Include 
this ability when you seek information or resources in 
another time or when you slip back or forward for tacti­
cal advantage. Careful, though—this ability is prone to 
causing serious amounts of continuity trouble.
Descriptors: Psychic, Hypertech, Unmoored in Time
Limits: Grandfather Paradox, Observer Effect, Lead
SFX:
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to find a cache of necessary items
you left for yourself.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to receive a message from your 
possible-future self (accuracy not guaranteed).
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to escape a scene you’re in.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to travel in space as well as time.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to take another character with
you to another time.
TRANSMUTE
You can create stuff out of thin air and other 
things by reconfiguring the basic attributes of matter. At 
the smallest level, you can change an object’s atomic or 
molecular structure; you can also change its overall shape 
or structure. You can’t change an object’s mass, only shift 
it around; nor can you change the amount of energy the 
object stores as heat or chemical energy. Include this 
ability when you turn air into useful tools, convert the 
ground under an opponent into a slippery morass, or bend 
your surroundings to assist in a chase.
Descriptors: Magic, Super Science, Divinity
Limits: Distraction, an “Unworkable” Substance, Scarcity
SFX: 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create exactly the tool you need as 
a ⑧ stunt or asset.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a hole or doorway in a wall 
or other obstruction.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to sense if an object has been 
transmuted.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to change an object’s mass.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a bomb, the explosion of 
which counts as an area effect attack.


=== PAGE 216 ===
TUNNELING
You can dig deep under the ground as fast as 
a person can walk, allowing you to tunnel to and from 
your destinations. You probably don’t need to worry about 
tight or confined spaces, and you might have some wicked 
claws. Include this ability die when moving through dirt, 
spraying up loose earth, or slashing away at stone or
an opponent.
Descriptors: Stone, Earth, Dirt
Limits: Misdirection, Water, Earthquake
SFX:
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make tunnels that last for
the rest of the session as ⑧ stunts.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to escape a scene by digging an 
escape tunnel.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to find a weak point in any floor
by digging beneath it; this becomes a ⑧ stunt 
you can use for the rest of the scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to make tunnels collapse behind
you so that you can’t be followed.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use your claws to step up
your effect die when damaging something.
WALL WALKING
You can move up and down walls and across ceil­
ings as easily as walking across your living room floor. 
You can even stick to a ceiling and stay there where no 
one can see you. It’s not like anyone looks up anyway. If 
you’re making use of your clingy condition in combat or 
hiding up in the rafters, roll the ability’s die to help.
Descriptors: Magnetic, Sticky, Spines
Limits: Slow, Slick Surfaces, Water
SFX:
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to hide on a ceiling, making it easy for 
you to jump down into the middle of those below.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to escape a scene by a convenient 
window or similar exit to an outside wall.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to take another person with you
as you walk on the wall or ceiling.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to jump from wall to wall, keeping 
your grip as if on a flat surface. 
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step down incoming stress or 
complications when something you’re clinging
to collapses or falls.
WIND CONTROL
You have the power to control the movement of 
air, whirling it around or redirecting powerful winds. 
Include this ability die to use whirlwinds and gusts of 
air to tilt a test or contest in your favor.
Descriptors: Wind, Air, Storm
Limits: Grounded, Dirt, Vacuum
SFX:
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to fly a short distance.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a localized tornado.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a powerful wind that 
delivers stress or complications.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to lift another person or inanimate 
object off the ground and into the air.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to hold a target, object, even a 
moving car in place with powerful gusts of wind.
BETHANY BERG


=== PAGE 217 ===
213
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
ABILITIES AS GEAR 
From jetpacks to suits of armor to freeze rays, any ability 
in the game can be replicated with a device. These nifty 
gadgets work like abilities, except they all share the 
same limit—gear can be lost, broken, or stolen. This limit 
deprives you of your gear and, without it, you don’t have 
the ability at all (no die or SFX). And in the wrong hands, 
your own ability could potentially be used against you.
Gear is frequently custom-created for your character and 
doesn’t need to map exactly to any single ability. Borrow 
SFX from abilities that match your gear’s effect; weapons, 
such as a Tricked-Out Compound Bow, fall under the attack 
effect, while a Jetpack is a movement effect.
To design your own gear, you need an effect, a descrip­
tor, and SFX. You may add more SFX through growth or 
advancement, which might represent sending the gear to 
the lab or tinkering with it. Instead of stepping up your 
die rating, you can add a new descriptor to a piece of gear, 
making it multi-purpose. For example, instead of using 
growth to step up your Human Turret gear ⑧ (Attack 
descriptor) to ⑩, you could add the Defense descriptor 
to it, expanding the kinds of dice pools you could roll it in.
CLOAKING DEVICE
When it's tapped, this small electronic pendant 
briefly emits a low hum and a soft green light. Then 
it refracts light around the wearer so that they seem 
invisible. 
Descriptor: Perception
Limit: Gear
SFX: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to disappear and escape from a scene.
EMP BLASTER
This modified taser can shoot an EMP pulse in an 
aimed direction, allowing it to specifically disable single 
electronic devices rather than everything around it.
Descriptor: Electromagnetism
Limit: Gear
SFX: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to disable any electronic device,
including gear.
PERSONAL GRAVITY GENERATOR
This device lets the wearer create gravity fields 
of low and high gravity, affecting the wearer and others.
Descriptor: Gravity
Limit: Gear
SFX: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to hold a nearby character in place with a 
powerful gravity field.
POWERSUIT
This powered suit of metal armor protects the 
wearer from most forms of attack. Additional SFX and 
descriptors can make it a walking arsenal as well.
Descriptor: Iron
Limit: Gear
SFX: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step down your opponent’s effect die 
when they’re trying to harm you.
TRICKED-OUT COMPOUND BOW
This compound bow has been modified with 
the most advanced upgrades in bow-making technology 
available. Most of its SFX are attributed to hi-tech arrows.
Descriptor: Graphite Bow
Limit: Gear
SFX:
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use an electrically charged arrow 
that releases its charge on impact.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use an EMP arrow to disable all 
electronic devices within a scene.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use a grappling arrow to entangle a 
target and keep it from getting away.
•	 Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use a tranquilizer arrow to step up 
any sleep-inducing stress or complication.
MODS FOR ARMOR AND WEAPONS
Many players enjoy creating specialty weapons or armor in games where 
their non-powered characters deal with supernatural or superpowered 
threats. Gear represents that technology in a single trait, and these mods 
add more detail to gear. They add some complexity to the rules, so only 
use them if weapons and armor are a Big Deal in your game.
Ablative Armor: Abilities that represent armor or protection may 
prevent damage at the cost of being stepped down afterward. Compare 
your armor ability die rating to the attacker’s ability die (or, if no ability is 
used, the attacker’s skill or attack trait). If your ability die is greater than 
their die rating, their effect die is ignored and you take no effect from 
the attack. If your ability die is equal to or less than their ability die, their 
effect die is stepped down by one.
ARMOR
ATTACKER
IF ATTACKER SUCCEEDS
Breastplate ⑧
Iron Spear ⑥
Breastplate ⑧ 
stepped down to ⑥, 
effect die ignored.
Breastplate ⑧
Iron Spear ⑧ 
and up
Breastplate ⑧ 
stepped down to ⑥, 
effect die stepped
down by one.
Weapon Ranges: To represent the effect of various distances on 
ranged weapons, determine if attacking the target with your chosen 
weapon would be within its standard range, if it’d be a stretch, or 
if it’d be almost impossible. Assign a difficulty die to the opposition 
dice pool of 
 if it’s a stretch and a 
 if it’s almost impossible. You can 
come up with individual range bands for various weapons if you like, 
but something simple like this works for most games.


=== PAGE 218 ===
214 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
FANTASY 
MILESTONES
Here’s a variety of milestone examples from a 
heroic fantasy genre that you can adapt to any 
other genre. Most are universally applicable if 
you change the descriptive text a bit, and the 
XP rewards can be inspiration for creating your 
own milestone goals in other settings.
ACCURSED
The infernal forces of the multiverse have picked you to 
play some role in their unfathomable plans. Others call 
you unlucky, but you recognize a growing blackness in 
your heart… 
•	 1 XP when your attack demonstrates the sinister 
nature of your abilities.
•	 3 XP when you add at least a ⑧ to the doom 
pool, either from rolling two or more hitches on 
a single roll or by using an SFX that adds to the 
doom pool.
•	 10 XP when you are finally claimed by a villainous 
power for dark deeds, or you strike a major blow 
against a villainous power by using their own dark 
powers against them.
ASCETIC
How can one attain focus if they remain as the magpie, 
always seeking what shines instead of what matters? 
•	 1 XP when you abstain from a worldly pleasure.
•	 3 XP when you participate in an indulgence that 
leads to trouble.
•	 10 XP when you found an institution devoted to 
abstaining from worldly pleasures or abandon the 
path of the ascetic to live it up in one long party.
BLESSED
You were born under a divine star and followed a god’s 
calling. You spread the Word as you see fit so that you can 
spread your god’s blessings.
•	 1 XP when you perform a religious rite.
•	 3 XP when you inflict stress upon a blasphemer.
•	 10 XP when you complete a grand work in your 
god’s name(s) or become a martyr for your
god’s cause.
COMFORTABLE IN THE SHADOWS
Don’t look at me, I’m not important or interesting. I just 
want to stay alive and help from a safe distance. 
•	 1 XP when you hide or otherwise choose to stay 
out of the spotlight.
•	 3 XP when you leave the shadows to accomplish 
something important.
•	 10 XP when you step into the spotlight in front of 
a large group to accomplish something important 
or decide to fade away forever.
HAUGHTY NOBLE
You were born into aristocracy. You are well aware of your 
station in life and take pains to remind others of theirs. 
•	 1 XP when you say something dismissive about 
the lower class. 
•	 3 XP when you try to buy your way out of a 
problem or situation.
•	 10 XP when you surrender your noble station for 
adventure or give up for a life of nobility.
HOMEBODY
They say you can never go home. But if I can’t go back, I 
can bring home with me.
•	 1 XP when you remark to another character that 
something reminds you of home.
•	 3 XP when you do something adventurous that 
you could never do at home.
•	 10 XP when you retire home and write about your 
adventures, or you embrace the adventurous life 
and admit you can never go home.
NATALIA BACETTI


=== PAGE 219 ===
HONORABLE WARRIOR
I live by my reputation and the honor that burdens my
existence. Stand fast, foe! We shall let fate and our martial 
skills determine your destiny!
•	 1 XP when you state that a decision brings
honor or dishonor.
•	 3 XP when you put yourself in a position to 
take stress because the alternative would be 
dishonorable.
•	 10 XP when you perform an inexcusable act of 
dishonor in the course of the greater good or 
sacrifice yourself to maintain your honor.
LEADER
Adventurers are a chaotic, undisciplined bunch. You lead 
by example, trying to get your teammates back alive to 
enjoy the sweet taste of success. 
•	 1 XP when you give an order to a member
of your group.
•	 3 XP when a member of your group uses an
asset you created for them.
•	 10 XP when you are recognized for your 
achievements in a great adventure, or you
are deposed as leader in a mutiny.
MYSTERIOUS SAGE
Apocryphal, people say your wisdom is.
•	 1 XP when you make a cryptic observation.
•	 3 XP when you encounter something that you 
can’t explain.
•	 10 XP when you are exposed as not that wise, or 
when someone in your group is the Chosen One 
the prophecy spoke of!
NATURE’S GUARDIAN
I have been granted so many boons by our mother Earth.
I merely seek to honor her through my respect and devotion.
•	 1 XP when you eschew something artificial for a 
tool from nature.
•	 3 XP when you create an asset for someone else.
•	 10 XP when you lay down your life to protect the 
sanctity of nature, or if you allow nature to be 
harmed in a major way to complete an adventure.
PLANAR TRAVELER
Open your eyes to the realities outside your limited senses. 
There are other realities one must always consider. 
•	 1 XP when you follow a custom that’s unfamiliar 
to your companions.
•	 3 XP when you tune out of the material world in a 
way that endangers your companions.
•	 10 XP when you become bound to the material 
world, so you can never travel the planes again, or 
depart the material world for a new one.
TREASURE HUNTER
It’s not about amassing riches; it’s about acquiring and 
disposing of it in the most thrilling and entertaining 
manner possible. You consulted maps, scoured rumors, 
raided ruins, and killed monsters and it’s not even noon yet.
•	 1 XP when you acquire or spend money.
•	 3 XP when you search for treasure during a battle.
•	 10 XP when you find the big score, or when you 
spend all of your money in an act of altruism.
RAFAEL SARMENTO


=== PAGE 220 ===
216 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
THE
MOTOR POOL
In some settings, such as Hammerheads on page 150, 
vehicles like spaceships, sailing ships, or RVs need more 
of a mechanical role than signature assets provide. If 
they’re as important to the story as the characters are, 
then they deserve more attention. To make vehicles come 
to life, each group of players maintains a vehicle file, a 
bit like a character file, that contains attributes, distinc­
tions, and signature assets. Players can use their vehicle 
to accomplish goals such as chasing down criminals or 
staging attacks on enemy installations.
VEHICLE TRAITS
In addition to the traits of the vehicle’s pilot, engineer, 
and other PCs, the vehicle itself possesses several traits 
that can be added to rolls made when PCs make tests or 
contests. These traits sometimes replace (attributes) and 
sometimes complement or supplement (distinctions and 
signature assets) existing PC traits.
VEHICLE ATTRIBUTES
Primarily, vehicle attributes replace team attributes when 
a PC is assembling a dice pool that involves the vehicle. 
There are as many as four different attributes:
•	 Engines measures the agility and speed of your 
vehicle, including how well it handles and the kind 
of problems the engine might have. The higher 
the Engines die rating, the faster and more agile 
it is. A lower Engines die rating might indicate the 
vehicle is awkward to maneuver or just plain slow.
•	 Frame is the structure that contains the interior 
of the vehicle and keeps everything together.
A higher Frame means that your vehicle is strong 
and secure, while a weaker Frame might indicate 
perpetual problems with the exterior.
•	 Systems helps the vehicle operate, including 
life support, communications, internet access, 
computers, and navigation. The higher the 
Systems die rating, the more technically 
sophisticated the vehicle is. A lower Systems
die rating indicates a no-frills vehicle, or one
with a lot of hotwired parts.
•	 Crew represents the skill of the crew of a GMC-
operated vehicle. A higher Crew die rating 
indicates trained professionals, while a lower 
rated Crew is either unskilled or flying with a 
skeleton team. (PC-operated vehicles don’t
have a Crew score.)
VEHICLE DISTINCTIONS
Vehicles have vehicle distinctions with SFX like basic 
character distinctions. Vehicle distinctions may be added 
to a roll when a character is using the vehicle to accom­
plish a task. A player may add both a vehicle distinction 
and a personal distinction to a single roll.
Vehicle distinctions come in three types, and each vehicle 
has one distinction from each category:
•	 Model determines the vehicle’s starting attributes 
and indicates the vehicle’s base type.
•	 History reveals how old or new the vehicle is.
It can also indicate the vehicle’s current use.
•	 Customization reveals how the vehicle has
been modified, remodeled, or upgraded since
its initial build. 
Each vehicle distinction comes with a Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ 
when you switch out this distinction’s ⑧ for a ④ SFX, but 
other SFX are also unlockable. Like personal distinction 
SFX, vehicle distinction SFX are constructed by selecting 
appropriate benefits (“reroll a die, step down a complica­
tion, earn a ●
Ⓟ”) and drawbacks (“spend a ●
Ⓟ, step up a 
complication, choose to do something risky”).
VEHICLE SIGNATURE ASSETS
Like individual PCs, vehicles have signature assets that 
can be added to a dice pool. These assets represent modi­
fications or resources that are available on the vehicle, 
ranging from a Sophisticated GPS to Lethal Machine Guns. 
Typically, vehicle signature assets have a rating of ⑧.
F88 Blue Racer ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
Fresh Off the Custom Rack ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
Upgraded Handling ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
HIGH-TECH
STREET BIKE
This is a sweet road-worthy 
motorcycle that has all the 
newest tech for elite riders.
Engines
Frame
Systems
SIGNATURE ASSETS
Racing Wheels 
Protective Shield 


=== PAGE 221 ===
217
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
H. WON
ALEX JAY BRADY
TRAINING UP VEHICLE RESOURCES
Players can spend a session to train up vehicle resources 
instead of improving their own character files. As with 
an individual PC, vehicles can swap distinctions, add or 
step up signature assets, and unlock new SFX. PCs can 
also pool session expenditures to purchase improvements 
to the vehicle. It’s impossible for a vehicle to swap out its
model distinction.
USING VEHICLES
PCs make tests or engage in contests using the vehicle’s 
traits any time the vehicle’s Engines, Frame, or Systems 
matter more than the individual PC’s attributes.
BUILDING DICE POOLS
Vehicle dice pools are assembled by pairing an attri­
bute with a skill—or an equivalent pair of traits (such as 
an affiliation, role, or specialty). One of the PC’s prime 
traits is paired with the appropriate vehicle trait, result­
ing in rolls that combines the vehicle’s features with the
PC’s skills. 
THE SCALE OF SUCCESS OR FAILURE
It’s important to remember that success or failure in 
vehicle tests typically affect the whole group. If a failed 
roll leads to the complication Failing Coolant System, the 
results of that complication affect everyone on board the 
vehicle. Be careful not to lay on the costs of failure too 
quickly, as a single bad roll could potentially knock out 
the whole group in one hit.
ASSETS AND COMPLICATIONS
Players can purchase assets and acquire complications 
that affect their vehicle just as they can for individ­
ual characters. Any asset purchased by a player for the 
vehicle starts at a ⑥ and lasts for a scene, and any hitches 
rolled on a vehicle test can be activated by the GM to 
add complications to the vehicle. If the result of a test or 
contest would take out a vehicle, any PC may spend a ●
Ⓟ 
to take a complication equal to the highest rolling die in 
the opposing pool to keep the vehicle in the fight.
Quantum-Class Space Frigate ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
Veteran of the Last War ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
Planetary Defense Systems ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s
⑧ for a ④.
STAR FRIGATE
A proven vessel in the Galactic 
Federation’s stellar navy, 
ideal for protecting planetary 
installations from orbit.
Engines
Frame
Systems
Crew
SIGNATURE ASSETS
Turbolasers 
Defense Shield 
Long-Range Scanners 


=== PAGE 222 ===
BUILDING YOUR VEHICLE
Creating vehicles is a fairly simple process similar to 
the scratch-built character creation method in Prime 
Characters (page 44). To construct a new vehicle, players 
should follow these steps:
STEP 1: PICK A MODEL
Players start vehicle construction by selecting the model 
distinction, such as F92 Stealth Fighter, Autogyro Class 
X, or Resolute-Class Frigate. In addition to adding the 
first distinction, assign a ⑧ to each of the three attributes 
of Engines, Frame, and Systems. Step up one attribute by 
up to two steps, but step down another attribute or both 
additional attributes by the same total number. So, you 
might have ⑫, ⑧, and ④; ⑫, ⑥, and ⑥; or ⑩, ⑧, and 
⑥. You can also choose to keep all three at ⑧.
STEP 2: CHOOSE 2 MORE DISTINCTIONS
In addition to the model distinction, players should choose 
two more distinctions for the vehicle. One represents 
the vehicle’s history, and another its customization. For 
example, you might take Years in the Service and Custom 
Interior; Only One Previous Owner and Overhead Gun 
Rack; or Made the Omega Run and Smuggler Refit.
SABINA LEWIS
STEP 3: CHOOSE DISTINCTION SFX
Each distinction gets the Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you 
switch out this distinction’s ⑧ for a ④ SFX for free. 
Players should choose two additional SFX to unlock (if 
you have prepared distinctions in advance for your group) 
or come up with two additional SFX to attach to one or 
two of your distinctions.
STEP 4: CHOOSE SIGNATURE ASSETS
Each vehicle gets two ⑧ signature assets. Players should 
select two that represent special features you’d like on 
the vehicle (such as Gravity Grapplers), something the 
vehicle gives access to that other vehicle owners might not 
have (such as Intergalactic Trade License), or minor GMC 
or crew that come with the vehicle (such as Pit Crew). If 
vehicles are a central part of your game, consider prepar­
ing a list of signature assets for players to choose from or 
unlock later in the game during advancement.
STEP 5: NAME YOUR VEHICLE
Finally, the players should name the vehicle and discuss 
some biographical information, such as:
•	 Who owns the vehicle? How did they procure it?
•	 How do you keep the vehicle up? What sort of 
jobs do you usually take?
•	 What improvements have been made to the 
vehicle? What’s always broken and can’t be fixed?
OPTIONS
Engines
Frame
Systems
Base
Example 1
Example 2


=== PAGE 223 ===
219
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
As part of the Cortex Prime Kickstarter, several backers 
pledged for the opportunity to have Cortex characters of 
their own creation included in this Game Handbook. Herein 
are eight such characters, built from combinations of traits 
and SFX found throughout this book. You can use them as 
the seed of an all-new Cortex setting, or try your hand at 
adapting them to your own ongoing game.
CHARACTERS FROM
THE CORTEX MULTIVERSE
ARTUR TREFFNER


=== PAGE 224 ===
220 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
MARIELLA ASHFORD
The formidable young matriarch of a family in a sweeping courtly 
drama set in a grim fantasy world much like England’s Wars of 
the Roses. Her son Bowen was fated to be stillborn until Mariella 
made a deal with a shadowy power so that he might live. Now, the 
child has mystical powers all of his own, powers that Mariella can 
occasionally call upon.
LORD ASHFORD (YOUNGER BROTHER) ⑧
Aidan needs me, even if he doesn’t realize it.
TIERNAN (YOUNGER HALF BROTHER) ⑧
Tiernan knows the deep mysteries of the world.
TORI (LADY’S MAID/BODYGUARD) ⑥
Tori is my secret weapon.
ELLORY (HUSBAND) ⑥
Ellory is everything I need in a spouse.
RELATIONSHIPS
Lady of the House ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
I Would Do Anything for my Children ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Mother’s Love: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use Mental to defend 
against a Physical threat to you or your children.
Words Can Kill Surely as Blades ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Paper Bullets of the Brain: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a ⑧ 
asset representing a secret or rumor you know would 
affect a person in the scene with you.
DISTINCTIONS
Physical
Social
Mental
Created by Amanda Valentine
VALUES
Duty
Integrity
Loyalty
Power
Vengeance
RESOURCES
•	 Chamber of Physick (Lore, Medicine) ⑥⑥
•	 Lord’s Small Council (Political, Military) ⑥⑥⑥
•	 Ashford Castle (Political, Safety) ⑥⑥
•	 Mystic Baby (Scary, Magic) ⑥⑥⑥⑥


=== PAGE 225 ===
221
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
CAROL AZEVEDO
AVENGING SPIRIT
The Avenging Spirit is a mysterious supernatural figure, ideal for 
a noir setting set in the 1920s or 1930s that focuses less on action 
and more on intense dramatic moments.
LINDA TRUMAN (EX-WIFE) ⑧
ROGER ASHBURY (FORMER BOSS) ⑧
NICOLAI KOSTEVSKY (CRIME KINGPIN) ⑧
KELLY HWANG (SCHOOL TEACHER) ⑥
MOSTHENES (ELDER GHOST) ⑥
EVERYONE ELSE ④
RELATIONSHIPS
Spirit of Trauma ⑧
A victim of a horrific crime, the spirit is now trapped 
between the land of the living and the afterlife.
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Being of the Fade: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to ignore physical objects 
like walls, furniture, and other inorganic obstacles for 
the rest of the scene.
	
ɬ Wrathful Glare: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to double your Wrath when 
turning your anger against a mortal.
Curious About the Material World ⑧
Possessed of insatiable curiosity about the mortal realms, 
the spirit has learned to focus on the details rather than see 
the forest for the trees.
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Inquisitive: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reroll when you are 
investigating clues or secrets in a scene.
Uncertain Future ⑧
With no clear path to the afterlife, the spirit must make 
choices that resolve their fate.
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ The Endless Guilt: Earn a ●
Ⓟ and step down a 
complication when you give in on a contest because you 
don’t feel worthy.
DISTINCTIONS
Created by R Holds
VALUES
Envy
Gluttony
Greed
Lust
Pride
Wrath
Sloth


=== PAGE 226 ===
222 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
BELMARIUS
Divided We Stand ⑧
A shame my bifurcation spell faltered, scattering pale shards 
of my former self throughout the realms. Or did I choose 
this life of 100 selves at once? Sometimes I forget…
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ The Other Me: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you drop everything to 
interact with another self that just showed up in person 
or in your head.
	
ɬ Life Once Lived: Add a ⑥ and step down your role die 
when you reveal a moment from your previous life. Then 
step up your effect die.
Abdicated Archmage ⑧
To become an Archmage of the Circle required magical 
skill and power the likes of which the gods themselves take 
heed of. And avarice to match. Renouncing my blood oath 
prompted none of my adversaries within the Circle to do 
the same. Quite the opposite I suspect.
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Entropic Master: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reroll your dice when 
you trust in luck and charge into a risky situation without 
hesitation or preparation.
	
ɬ Circle Interference: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when agents of the Circle 
appear or otherwise interfere with something very 
important to you.
Freedom! ⑧
I will break the chains the Circle binds their people with one 
by one, then pull their towers down around their ears to 
wake them from their torpor.
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Liberator: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to create a ⑧ asset for the rest 
of the scene when someone you have liberated decides 
to pay you back.
	
ɬ They Know Me: Gain a ●
Ⓟ and create a ⑧ complication 
because you must interact with bandits or authorities 
who might recognize you.
DISTINCTIONS
SIGNATURE ASSET
Dodecahedron 
: A portable pocket dimension within
which is enough living space to comfortably fit 6 people.
Belmarius is a former Archmage of the Circle in a sword and 
sorcery setting whose pursuit of powerful magicks split him into 
countless versions of himself. He now travels the world, freeing 
those in chains while encountering his duplicates in all of their 
myriad lives.
POWER SETS
THE CIRCLE UNLEASHED
EMISSARY OF ENTROPHY
	
ɬ SFX: Scion of Chaos: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reroll when using
a The Circle Unleashed power.
	
ɬ SFX: Unleashed: Step up or double any The Circle 
Unleashed power for one roll. If the roll fails, gain a 
complication equal in size to your power die.
	
ɬ Limit: Uncontrollable: Change any The Circle Unleashed 
power into a complication and gain a ●
Ⓟ. Activate an 
opportunity or recover the complication to restore
the power.
	
ɬ Limit: Mutually Exclusive: Shut down The Circle 
Unleashed to activate Emissary of Entropy. Shut down 
Emissary of Entropy to restore The Circle Unleashed.
Primal Chaos (Sorcery) ⑩
Belmarius’s Bedevilman (Psychic Blasts) ⑧
Growth ⑥
Shapeshift ⑥
Shrinking ⑥
Created by Marcus Morrisey
Physical
Social
Mental
ROLES
Engineer
Rogue
Wizard


=== PAGE 227 ===
223
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
ADMIRAL CHANTEE
Pirates whisper to each other of a mysterious woman’s voice
that precedes the disappearance of their compatriots without 
a trace. She collects these stories like medals, and she gleefully 
shares the emerging legend of the ship by signing to the
deaf crew of The Black Shanty.
Between the Devil
and the Deep Blue Sea ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Light it on Fire, Lads: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to add a ⑥ and 
step up the effect die on any attack roll using a ship's 
signature assets.
Pipe Down! ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ War Drums: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up or double your 
Social die in any contest involving intimidation or 
threats while at sea.
Pirate Queen ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ And Up She Rises: If you would be taken out during a 
scene while on a ship or at sea, spend a ●
Ⓟ to enact a 
daring escape or mysterious death. Spend a ●
Ⓟ to join 
any subsequent scene that you were not already in.
DISTINCTIONS
WATER SWORD DANCE ⑧
	
ɬ Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up or double your Physical 
attribute die.
	
ɬ Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reroll a dice pool that includes
Water Sword Dance.
SIREN’S SONG ⑩
	
ɬ Spend a ●
Ⓟ to use this as an area effect.
	
ɬ Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you attract the wrong sort of 
attention from your song.
CREW LOYALTY ⑩
	
ɬ Gain a ●
Ⓟ when one of your crew defies your orders.
	
ɬ Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you must rescue a crew member in 
a crisis.
ABILITIES
Created by Tina Lam Collier
SIGNATURE ASSETS
Ancestral Split Drum 
Tapping Boots 
Physical
Social
Mental
Shadow in the Fog ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this 
distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.
Deathly Quiet Rigging ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this 
distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.
Sign Language Communication ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this 
distinction’s ⑧ for a ④.
THE BLACK SHANTY
This state-of-the-art brigantine 
towers over most ships of its 
class in the region—so they say.
No one really knows, as it comes 
suddenly out of nowhere to prey 
upon its quarry, making not a 
sound upon the waves.
Engines
Frame
Crew
SIGNATURE ASSETS
Whistling Cannons 
Whispering Sails 
TITHI LUADTHONG
CAROL AZEVEDO
DISTINCTIONS


=== PAGE 228 ===
224 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
DR. JEREMIAH CROWE
Deathless Revenant ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reroll your dice when you align with your 
true nature as a deathless revenant.
	
ɬ Gain a ⑧ complication to step up a specialty when you 
align with your true nature.
Student of Medicine ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up an attribute when you connect to 
your old life.
	
ɬ Gain a ⑧ complication to double your attribute die 
when you connect to your old life.
Swift Stroke Against Injustice ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Spend a ●
Ⓟ to double your resource dice when you 
embrace your obsession.
	
ɬ Gain a ⑧ complication to step up your resource dice 
when you embrace your obsession.
DISTINCTIONS
A Civil War era physician, Dr. Crowe was murdered in cold blood 
by a hateful mob while trying to protect another man. Brought 
back to life by alchemy as an ageless crusader, he has since turned 
his unique skills and abilities to thwart injustice and bring hope
to a dark modern world. 
Created by Jeremy Puckett
Guile
Grace
Reason
Vigor
Courage
RESOURCES
•	 Secret Lab (Occult, Science) ⑥⑥⑥
•	 Blue Mountain City Police Department
(Legal, Tactics) ⑥⑥
•	 University of Kentucky: College of Medicine
(Medicine) ⑥⑥⑥
SIGNATURE ASSETS
Plague Mask 
Cane Sword 
SPECIALTIES
Crime Master
Combat Expert
Medical Expert
All Others
Science Expert


=== PAGE 229 ===
225
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
EUGENE DOHERTY
Eugene is a second-generation Irish-American investigator in a 
1920’s Lovecraftian game. A former radical, he has turned toward 
more peaceful forms of protest and confronts eldritch horrors 
with the grit and determination of a seasoned WW1 veteran.
Grizzled Dough Boy
Who Has Seen Too Much ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
Father Murphy
Guides and Protects Me ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
Green Revolutionary Anarchist ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
FEAR TO TREAD
When you first enter an area hidden by darkness, you 
may step up your Exhausted stress to step down your 
Afraid or Anxious stress.
AGAINST THE DARK
When you’re pursuing a case linked to the Mythos, you 
may add a ④ to any test or contest in order to step 
up your effect die by one. If you roll a hitch on the test 
or contest, the GM can step up your stress or create a 
complication without giving you a ●
Ⓟ.
DISTINCTIONS
TALENTS
Created by Jonathan Oakes
SIGNATURE ASSETS
Colt 1911 Pistol 
Bible 
Physical
Social
Mental
SKILLS
Theology
Repair
Stealth
Contacts
Rapport
Burglary
Firearms
Notice
Cthulhu Myths
CAROL AZEVEDO


=== PAGE 230 ===
226 CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
ELIX
Elix is one of the few humans left scattered across the galaxy. 
Growing up between worlds wasn’t easy and Elix is ready for Terra 
2.0. Using ancient Terran magic with a space-age twist, they travel 
with a team of interplanetary problem solvers to reunite humanity 
and make the galaxy a better place to be.
Intergalactic Connection
and Communication ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ New Visions of Interaction: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to reroll a dice 
pool that includes Willpower.
Old Magic in a New World⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Spell Twisting: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to step up or double an 
attribute when you include Sorcery in your dice pool.
When Nowhere is Home,
Everywhere is Home ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
	
ɬ Centering: Spend a ●
Ⓟ to ignore a complication for the 
next test or contest.
DISTINCTIONS
POWER SET
SIGNATURE ASSET
Spell Tablet 
Created by Mary Rose Valentine
Intelligence
Alertness
Strength
Vitality
Willpower
Agility
ROLES
Scholar
Muscle
Diplomat
Mechanic
Leader
TERRAN MYSTICISM
	
ɬ SFX: Call of Old Earth: Add a ⑥ and step up your effect 
die by one when using Transmutation to create assets.
	
ɬ SFX: Thread of Life: Add Sorcery to your dice 
pool when helping others recover their stress or 
complications. Spend a ●
Ⓟ to recover your own or 
another’s physical-based stress or complications.
	
ɬ Limit: The Old Power: When using a Terran Mysticism 
power, both 1s and 2s count as hitches.
Sorcery ⑧
Transmutation ⑩


=== PAGE 231 ===
227
CHAPTER 6 PRIME LISTS
CAROL AZEVEDO
MIDNIGHT-BLUE
Paull Cross takes on the identity of Midnight-Blue when fighting crime 
with the sacred powers entrusted to him by the Goddess Nyx.
Love Gets You Killed ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
Investigator of the Unknown ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
Not a Morning Person ⑧
	
ɬ Hinder: Gain a ●
Ⓟ when you switch out this distinction’s 
⑧ for a ④.
DISTINCTIONS
POWER SETS
MILESTONES
FAVORED OF NYX
POWER OF NIGHT
	
ɬ SFX: Midnight Whispers: On a failed reaction, spend
a ●
Ⓟ to add Teleport to your dice pool (or step up
by one if already in the pool) and reroll all dice.
	
ɬ SFX: Midnight Revelation: Add ⑥ to your dice pool
and step up the effect die by one when you use
Mystic Vision or Shadow Influence to create an
asset or complication.
	
ɬ SFX: Night Promises: Add ⑥ emotional stress to 
include Flight, Invisibility, Intangibility, or Teleport 
from the Power of Night power set in a dice pool. Step 
down both power dice by one to include two.
	
ɬ Limit: Embrace the Night: Shut down Favored of Nyx to 
activate the Power of Night power set. Shut down Power 
of Night to restore Favored of Nyx.
	
ɬ SFX: Caress of Midnight: When in shadow, spend a
●
Ⓟ to use your Godlike Stamina to recover your 
physical stress. Upon nightfall, step down physical 
trauma by one.
	
ɬ Limit: Spend a ●
Ⓟ or take ⑥ emotional stress at
the beginning of each of your turns if Power of Night
is active.
Mystic Vision (Senses) ⑩
Shadow Influence ⑧
Superhuman Reflexes ⑧
Cold Blast ⑩
Flight ⑧
Godlike Stamina ⑫
Intangibility ⑩
Invisibility ⑩
Mystic Vision (Senses) ⑫
Shadow Mastery ⑩
Teleport ⑧
THE SUPERNATURAL AND MYTHS ARE REAL?
•	 1 XP when your attack demonstrates the 
sinister nature of your abilities.
•	 3 XP when you add at least a ⑧ to the 
doom pool from rolling two or more hitches 
on a single roll.
•	 10 XP when you are finally claimed by a 
villainous power for dark deeds, or you 
strike a major blow against a villainous 
power by using their own dark powers 
against them.
CALL OF THE NIGHT
•	 1 XP when you take emotional stress to 
draw on the powers of Nyx, primordial 
goddess of the night.
•	 3 XP when you use a power trait for a 
reaction and your reaction is successful.
•	 10 XP when you accept Nyx’s love and 
merge with her, or when you spurn her love 
and deny her full melding with your body 
and mind.
Created by Christopher P. Crossley
Shadow
Day
Night
SPECIALTIES
Covert Master
Cosmic Expert
Crime Expert
Mystic Expert
Menace Expert
