
=== PAGE 10 ===
INTRO TO CORTEX PRIME
6
If you’ve come from other roleplaying games, even if you’ve 
played previous Cortex-based games, it might seem daunt­
ing to jump straight into a modular, customizable rules-set 
like this one. This primer serves as a bare bones look at 
Cortex Prime before plunging into the rest of the rulebook.
READ THIS FIRST:
THE CORTEX PRIMER
THE CORE OF CORTEX
Here is the core of Cortex, stripped down to the basics: 
Everyone writes down their character’s name
and one central thing they’re good at doing.
This is their trait (“Seasoned Journalist”).
Each player makes decisions for
their character (“What would Jane do?”).
If a player wants their character to do something 
that the character’s trait would help them do, they 
roll ⑥⑥⑥ (“My experience as a journalist will 
help me gather information on this subject”).
If their trait doesn’t have anything to do with
the thing they want to do, they roll ⑥⑥
(“My experience as a journalist will not help
me win this fistfight”).
Every character starts with one plot point 
(represented by this symbol: ●
Ⓟ).
Here’s a super basic Cortex Prime character:
When you want to do something and there’s something 
that might get in your way (such as the environment, 
another character, or time), you make a test. Someone 
else picks up dice to establish the difficulty number you 
must beat to succeed.
•	 For easy opposition, roll ⑥.
•	 For challenging opposition, it’s ⑥⑥.
•	 For hard opposition, it’s ⑥⑥⑥
or more.
Then you either roll the default ⑥⑥ or roll ⑥⑥⑥ if your 
trait is applicable. 
If you roll 1 on a die, that die is called a hitch and doesn’t 
count. When you roll a hitch the GM can give you a ●
Ⓟ. 
You can spend a ●
Ⓟ later to add a ⑥ to your roll if you can 
describe something cool that helps you out.
Total up your dice, excluding any hitches. If you had more 
than two dice, only add the best two dice together. Your 
opposition does the same.
•	 If you beat your opposition’s total,
you succeed!
•	 If you get equal to or less, you fail.
Talk about what happened instead.
1
2
3
4
5
In this handbook, dice are represented by the symbols below, 
using solid shapes for dice type and numbers outlined by their 
respective dice shapes for example rolls.
JANE DeFALT
BASE TRAIT:
Seasoned Journalist
DICE SYMBOL REFERENCE CHART
TYPE
SYMBOL
SAMPLE RESULTS
d4
d6
d8
d10
d12


=== PAGE 11 ===
INTRO TO CORTEX PRIME
7
Jane, working undercover to investigate 
possible corruption, must sneak into the 
corporate lab to get some files.
The GM decides this task should be hard 
to pull off and rolls ⑥⑥⑥.
2
2
Jane’s player reasons that she has plenty 
of experience with all-nighters from 
journalism school.
The trait, Seasoned Journalist, is 
applicable to this contest so the GM 
allows them to roll ⑥⑥⑥.
Jane’s player chooses the two highest 
results for a total of 9, which beats 
the GM!
Jane’s total of 5 doesn’t beat the GM, 
but she picks up a ●
Ⓟ for rolling a 
one (a hitch).
Jane’s player chooses the two highest 
results for a total of 11, which beats 
the GM!
THREE EXAMPLE SITUATIONS
Jane needs to get a big pitch done by 
tomorrow morning.
The game moderator (GM) decides 
staying up late should be an easy 
task, so they roll ⑥.
Jane needs to talk to a source inside a 
members-only biker bar.
The GM decides that it should be more 
challenging to get past the bouncer 
and rolls ⑥⑥.
Jane manages to stay up all night to 
finish her pitch. Next morning, she 
walks into her boss’s office and slams 
it down on the desk.
Jane’s player tries to convince the GM 
that her journalistic background 
would make her a smooth talker.
The GM disagrees that her trait would 
apply here so they restrict the player 
to rolling only ⑥⑥.
The bouncer shoves Jane into the 
mud. The source comes out and 
hands her his card. She’ll get her info 
later—but will she hit her deadline?
Jane’s player points out that her 
informant provided the lab schedule, 
so she uses Seasoned Journalist 
and a ●
Ⓟ for good measure.
The GM agrees to that and lets the 
player roll ⑥⑥⑥⑥.
Jane discovers some damning 
evidence and sneaks out with the 
incriminating paperwork before 
anyone notices she’s not at her desk.
THE DEADLINE
THE INFORMANT
THE SCOOP
1
1
1
2
3
3
3
GM’s Roll
Player’s Roll
GM’s Roll
Player’s Roll
GM’s Roll
Player’s Roll
GM’s Roll
Player’s Roll
JEREMY NGUYEN
GM’s Roll
Player’s Roll
GM’s Roll
Player’s Roll


=== PAGE 12 ===
INTRO TO CORTEX PRIME
8
GOT IT.
WHAT ELSE?
Cortex Prime provides mechanical support for the various 
genre styles that you may want to emulate, or for the way 
you want to play. From drama-heavy games with lots of 
character interaction to action-heavy games with perilous 
challenges and exciting opposition, Cortex Prime can be 
modified, assembled, and run in hundreds of ways.
There’s a common language shared by each Cortex Prime 
game, and it’s this language that makes the system so 
readily customizable. Let’s go into a little more detail 
about what that design language looks like.
TRAITS
Every Cortex Prime game—even our stripped-down basic 
rules-lite version—incorporates traits. A trait, when you 
get right down to it, is a descriptive label with a die rating 
attached. Nearly everything on your character file is a 
trait. For the most part, the rating is a die type (④ through 
⑫) but it could be a multiple of dice (like ⑧⑧) or two 
die types together (like ④ + ⑫). Cortex Prime traits are 
almost universally this: Trait Name <dice icon>.
A game typically breaks traits down into sets, such as 
attributes, roles, values, and so on. If you’re building your 
own Cortex Prime game, you pick trait sets that most suit 
your setting or world. Maybe you want to use affiliations 
and not attributes, or relationships and not skills. Maybe 
everyone has super powers or maybe only aliens do. Sets 
are like buckets the various traits are dropped into, divid­
ing a character file into areas that are easily defined and 
assigned when making new characters.
Trait sets are also the individual components of a dice 
pool. Most of the time when a player rolls to determine 
an outcome, they grab a die from each of the appropri­
ate sets on their character file. The act of choosing a die 
from a set helps pull you back into the story and give some 
narrative structure to what may otherwise seem like just 
an elaborate dice game.
PLOT POINTS
Cortex Prime games run on a narrative currency called 
plot points (●
Ⓟ) that influence the plot. They’re the fuel 
for the system’s engine. The cycle of earning, spending, 
and then earning more plot points is something that you 
must maintain when deciding what mods to use.
So long as there are various ways to earn ●
Ⓟ, spend ●
Ⓟ, 
and explain what it means to do this within the context 
of the story, you’re set.
If you rely too heavily on ●
Ⓟ being generated by utterly 
random occurrences (such as rolling hitches), players may 
feel that their character’s progress is arbitrary and out of 
their control. Always include some way the player can 
make a risky or challenging choice and gain ●
Ⓟ in the 
process. Don’t leave this to the GM to manage—it should 
be in the hands of the players.
ROLL AND KEEP
In Cortex Prime, you may roll a lot of dice, but you don’t 
add them all together. By default, players keep two dice 
to add together for their total.
The statistical qualities of rolling a bunch of dice of 
varying sizes is a little beyond this primer, but if you’re 
worried about the odds, take some comfort in the fact that 
it operates on a curve. It seems obvious when choosing 
dice that a ⑫ is better than a ④, that five dice should logi­
cally result in a better average total than two (especially 
if you keep the two highest rolling dice in any given roll).


=== PAGE 13 ===
But there’s a lot of variation there. The more dice you roll 
and the bigger they are, the better chance you have of 
getting a higher total. There’s an element of risk, however, 
because the more dice you roll, the better chance of 
rolling hitches.
STEPPING UP AND 
STEPPING DOWN
Cortex Prime games feature a lot of “dice tricks.” One 
of the most common methods of altering the outcome 
is by changing the type of die being rolled. Things like 
distinctions, SFX, and talents often allow you to step up 
a die (changing it from a die of one size to one of a larger 
size) or step down a die (the reverse). We do this in lieu of 
flat modifiers, to preserve the swingy nature of the dice 
pool, and to give you the feeling of improving your odds 
without actually breaking the balancing nature of the roll-
and-keep method.
ASSETS AND 
COMPLICATIONS
Another central part of Cortex Prime is the use of assets 
and complications. This includes such things as stress 
or resources or stunts—basically, temporary traits that 
either help you out or make life more difficult for you.
An asset is a trait you create during play that instantly 
labels a part of the fiction as significant. Sure, there are 
guns everywhere in an action movie setting, but when it’s 
a Gun ⑧ people take notice. Whether you create them by 
spending ●
Ⓟ or as a result of a die roll, an asset allows you 
to improve your chance at influencing the story by adding 
more dice in a flavorful and thematic way.
By contrast, complications are traits that make things 
harder for you. As Cortex Prime is almost always a game 
of opposed dice rolls, increasing the risk of something 
makes the opposition better by increasing their dice 
pool. Complications (or stress, or whatever they end up 
being called in your game) are bonus dice included in 
your opposition’s dice pool when your negative circum­
stances would hinder you.
A healthy game of Cortex Prime often ends up with the 
playing area or character files or chat windows covered 
in sticky notes or index cards, each labeled with some 
asset or complication or equivalent. They come and go, 
they change hands, they get bigger or reduced in size, 
and they’re a sign that the story is evolving and changing, 
directly affected by the players and their choices.
WHAT’S NEXT?
This is just the beginning of a book packed with ideas,
suggestions, variables, and mods that you can use to 
create the game you want. With a shared design language 
and a shared goal of emulating genre, the rules and mods 
in this book are primed and ready to inspire, motivate, 
save time, and above all allow you and your players to 
express yourselves.
Go forth, mess around, and see what else 
you can strip away before you build it right 
back up again!
THOMAS SCHOLES


=== PAGE 14 ===
INTRO TO CORTEX PRIME
10
To play Cortex Prime, you’ll need a few other people, 
someone to manage the rules and prep the session, some 
dice, and a handful of other supplies. Most of all, you need 
this Game Handbook and a few hours to play the game.
PLAYERS
Cortex Prime works best with two to six players, each 
creating and playing their own player character or PC. 
The PCs together make up the group. Each PC gets their 
own character file for players to record important game 
statistics and details.
PLAYERS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR:
•	 Deciding what their PCs do.
•	 Confronting any problems that the GM
throws in front of them.
•	 Pointing their PCs in directions that make
for good stories.
•	 Supporting other PCs and giving them a
shot at what they’re good at.
•	 Deciding how their PCs change and grow
over time.
•	 In general, telling the story of their PCs.
WHAT YOU 
NEED TO PLAY
GAME MODERATOR
One person at the table doesn’t take a PC, instead playing 
the role of the game moderator (GM). The GM manages 
the session and presents exciting scenes, locations, and 
game moderator characters (or GMCs). Often, but not 
always, the GM is the person who bought the game and 
has read the book a few times.
THE GM IS RESPONSIBLE FOR:
•	 Preparing and presenting the session to
the players.
•	 Deciding how the GMCs react to the
group’s actions.
•	 Asking leading questions of the players to
lead them into further adventure.
•	 Revealing the important details of the
setting to the players.
•	 Facilitating the game rules at the table and 
maintaining the pace of the session.
•	 In general, bringing the world to life
around the other players.
ANNA “SARIANNE”
NEUMANNOVÁ


=== PAGE 15 ===
INTRO TO CORTEX PRIME
11
GAME DICE
Cortex Prime uses game dice of various sizes. You can 
pick them up from hobby stores or online. Dice often 
come in sets but can also be purchased individually. For 
each session, you need a bunch of four-sided, six-sided, 
eight-sided, ten-sided, and twelve-sided dice. You won’t 
need the twenty-sided die, or dice marked with special 
symbols, or those with percentage numbers. You will, 
however, need a fair amount of dice. We recommend a 
communal pool of dice for the table, with at least three 
or four of each type. The more dice you have the better.
If you’re playing online, you might have dice simulators 
for making virtual dice rolls. Make sure everyone playing 
approves of the method you use, and that everyone can 
see the results of each die in your die rolls.
A WAY TO KEEP TRACK
There’s a good reason tabletop RPGs are often called 
pen-and-paper RPGs. Every player as well as the GM 
should at least have access to scratch paper and writing 
implements. A whiteboard or dry-erase gaming mat large 
enough to draw maps and other diagrams on is helpful.
Cortex Prime is also purpose-built to be played online or 
with our digital tools. Whether your group uses tablets or 
laptops to keep track of character files and notes around 
the table, or your “table” is entirely virtual and you’re 
gathered together online, you can eschew the traditional 
pen and paper for a digital solution.
Visit www.cortexRPG.com to learn more. 
PLOT POINT TOKENS
You need a set of about a dozen or so game tokens to repre­
sent plot points. These can be poker chips, coins, glass 
beads, or plastic counters. Put a pile of them in the middle 
of the table where the GM and players can reach them.
When using our digital tools to play Cortex Prime, keeping 
track of plot points can be handled virtually.
TETRAHEDRON
Four equilateral triangles with three 
numbers on each face. Indicated by 
whatever number is on top or bottom.
HEXAHEDRON
Six square faces,
most common type 
of dice used.
OCTAHEDRON
Eight equilateral 
triangles (made up 
of two pyramids).
PENTAGONAL
TRAPEZOHEDRON
Ten congruent kites,
zero represents 10.
DODECAHEDRON
Twelve pentagonal 
faces connected to 
each other.
0
12
GLASS BEADS
DIGITAL
COINS
CANDY
POKER CHIPS
PLASTIC


=== PAGE 16 ===
SETTING
Every Cortex Prime game needs a setting, although in 
some cases the setting is created by the players and GM 
during the first session. Even if collaborative setting 
creation is your goal, you should have an idea of what 
kind of game you want to play, and what sort of world, 
background, and shared space your group expects to 
create characters and stories inside.
Pre-made Spotlight settings are included in this book, as 
well as in other Cortex Prime supplements and products. 
These settings vary in genre, tone, and detail. You can 
expect pre-made settings to specify what mods and traits 
are expected, what major conflicts, themes, and ideas are 
present in the world, as well as who the characters are, 
broadly speaking.
Note: This Handbook has three Spotlight settings:
Eidolon Alpha (page 132), Hammerheads (page 150),
and TRACE 2.0 (page 164).
Cortex Prime is built on previously published Cortex 
games based on popular media properties such as comic 
books and television shows, and each of those games 
has its own setting. You can treat those older games 
as pre-made settings or use them to inspire your own. 
You can also use a setting you and your group already 
know and enjoy, either from another roleplaying game 
or from media properties that don’t have their own
RPG adaptations.
H. WON
OUR EXAMPLE CORTEX GROUP
Throughout this book we include examples of play, and those 
examples feature the same players, GM, and characters for 
consistency. They are:
•	 Mary Rose: Game Moderator
•	 Amanda: The Engineer
•	 Adam: The Hero
•	 Tina: The Sage
If you look closely, you’ll see the Engineer, the Hero, the Sage, 
and several other archetypal characters in the artwork gracing 
these pages. Like Cortex Prime itself, they may vary widely in 
representation but they share common traits. See if you can 
spot them!


=== PAGE 17 ===
INTRO TO CORTEX PRIME
13
HOW TO
USE THIS BOOK
The Cortex Prime Game Handbook is divided into 
seven chapters, each covering an important part 
of the game:
Prime Intro: You’re reading this chapter already.
Prime Core: The basic rules of any Cortex Prime 
game and how they work, including dice, traits,
and plot points.
Prime Characters: Defining, describing,
and creating characters for Cortex Prime.
Prime Scenes: Framing, moderating,
and resolving scenes.
Prime Sessions: How to plan for and manage
Cortex Prime sessions, including GM advice.
Prime Settings: How to build and use your
own settings. Features three Spotlight settings
for use as-is or as inspiration.
Prime Lists: An appendix of lists, followed by
a glossary and index.
If you skipped “Read This First: A Cortex Primer” earlier 
in this chapter, start there. If you’ll be the game moder­
ator, you should read through the entire book at least 
once, and pay special attention to the Prime Core, Prime 
Characters, Prime Scenes, and Prime Sessions chapters as 
they contain the bulk of the game’s rules. Read the Prime 
Settings section for ideas on what sort of world you and 
your players want to set your game in. Use the Prime Lists 
chapter for reference as needed.
Players should eventually be familiar with Prime Core 
and Prime Characters, but as the GM it’s one of your 
responsibilities to introduce the rules and concepts to 
the players. There isn’t anything in this book that’s espe­
cially secret or that needs to be hidden from the players, 
unless you plan to use one of the Spotlight settings 
for your game—in that case you may want to encour­
age the players to let you brief them on those, to avoid
spoiling secrets.
USING MODS
This book includes a lot of mods that expand the basic 
rules, as explained in other chapters such as Prime 
Characters and Prime Sessions. Due to the modular 
approach of Cortex Prime, everything about this game 
can be hacked, drifted, modified, and changed as you 
see fit. Where possible, the book tells you what to expect 
when you use specific mods, and in some cases, what 
happens when you use two or more mods together, so 
you can assemble the right version of Cortex Prime for 
your game table.
Mods are called out using this symbol ȯ. You might see 
this symbol a lot. Where there’s a stated rule or game 
mechanic and there’s no mod symbol next to it, assume 
that you’re reading a Prime Core rule.
KEVIN HONG


=== PAGE 18 ===
NOÉ LEYVA
